1

Cognitive Neuroscience:
Definitions, Themes,
and Approaches
INTRODUCTION
Cognitive neuroscience is a relatively new discipline that has arisen
from the recent marriage of neuroscience, a biomedical field that has
flourished both conceptually and technically during the past century,
and cognitive science, a field of study rooted in the long-standing
interest of natural philosophers and psychologists in understanding
human mental processes. Consistent with these progenitors, research
in cognitive neuroscience integrates investigations of brain structure
and function, and seeks to measure cognitive abilities and behavior to
understand how the human brain works at all levels.
Despite its relative youth, cognitive neuroscience has rapidly become
one of the most active areas of scientific inquiry. Much of that excitement
comes from the questions that cognitive neuroscientists investigate,
which range from basic perceptual and motor processing to complex
thoughts and emotions. Why do we remember some events but not others? How do we understand the minds of others in social interactions?
How do our brains represent different goals when faced with a complex
decision?
To address these kinds of questions, cognitive neuroscientists study
both human and non-human animals with a diverse set of tools. Some
researchers monitor single neurons as they respond to stimuli, while
others track overall changes in processing-related metabolism in the
brain. Some examine the effects of brain damage on cognitive functions,
while others temporarily inactivate specific brain regions to disrupt
function. These diverse methods allow cognitive neuroscientists and
even beginning students to examine the brain as it functions. Cognitive
neuroscience, however, is not defined simply by the topics it studies or
by the tools it employs. It seeks to build on its parent fields by developing new models of cognitive functions that integrate ideas from both
neuroscience and cognitive science. This chapter introduces the definitions, themes, and approaches that are fully developed in the rest of the
book.

2 ■ CHAPTER 1

Cognition
Cognition is a Latin term that means “the faculty of knowing.” In practice, however, it refers to the set of processes (cognitive functions) that allow humans and

many other animals to perceive external stimuli, to extract key information and
hold it in memory, and ultimately to generate thoughts and actions that help
reach desired goals. Cognition is sometimes described as processing carried out
by the mind, but that description introduces problems, not least because mind
is a notoriously difficult term to define. In common parlance, the mind consists of our subjective, conscious experiences. Modern researchers rarely study
only those aspects of a cognitive function that are accompanied by conscious
experience. Many important aspects of cognition and behavior occur without
conscious experience either because they arise too rapidly (e.g., when a goalie
dives to stop a shot) or because they occur automatically in the background of
current processing (e.g., as our moment-to-moment experiences become transformed into our memories). In recognition of the difficulty in defining these
terms, in this chapter (and the book as a whole) we restrict the use of mind to the
subjective sense of self, and we use cognition or cognitive functions to describe the
specific sorts of information processing studied by cognitive neuroscientists.

Natural philosophy and early psychology
The phenomenology of cognition has always raised philosophical questions.
How do we perceive the world? What are the contents of our minds? Can we
freely control our behavior? Without experimental means to understand mental life, philosophers historically drew conclusions about cognition based on
introspection and reasoning. In the nineteenth century, the first true scientists
to address these sorts of issues (“psychologists”) built models of mental processes through behavioral observation and experimental manipulation. Many
of these pioneers (e.g., Wilhelm Wundt, Hermann von Helmholtz, and William
James) were trained as physicians and thus kept contact with developments in
the emerging discipline of neuroscience, even as they focused their efforts on
mental life. Many of their experimental methods (e.g., psychophysical judgment,
memorization for later testing) are still in use today as ways of quantifying the
processes of cognition.

Behaviorism
By the beginning of the twentieth century there was a growing dissatisfaction
with the lack of systematic progress in the study of mental processes. Aspects
of mental life like language and reasoning seemed largely intractable, and experimental methods like introspection and subjective judgments seemed inherently imprecise. As a result, psychology in that era, especially in North America,
came to be dominated by a new emphasis on highly controlled experiments that
matched objective external stimuli to measurable behavior (Figure 1.1). This
approach, called behaviorism, rejected subjective work on mental functions as
being outside the domain of proper scientific inquiry.
Experiments carried out by behaviorists like John Watson and B. F. Skinner
examined how changes in stimulus presentation (e.g., food rewards to a hungry
experimental animal) could shape how individuals adapt their behavior to
the demands of the environment. This research proved to be extraordinarily
successful. The simple recognition that food rewards made rats more likely
to engage in whatever behavior occurred immediately before the reward—a
process Skinner called “operant conditioning”—led to an explosion of interest
in methods for reinforcing or discouraging specific behaviors. Because the
basic processes of learning were thought to be a common feature of species
with complex nervous systems, the typical subjects of psychological research

COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE: DEFINITIONS, THEMES, AND APPROACHES

Figure 1.1 Research methods in behaviorist experiments In the early part of the
twentieth century, researchers called “behaviorists” studied psychological functions
using simple experiments conducted primarily on non-human animals. One of the
pioneers of behaviorist research, B. F. Skinner, is shown here in his laboratory.
Skinner and other researchers measured how changes in stimulus presentation (e.g.,
how often a reward is delivered) influence the subsequent behavior of the animal,
and they used such data to create models of learning, memory, and other functions.

were non-human animals—rats and pigeons in particular. But the behaviorist
approach was enthusiastically applied to human problems as well, including
challenges in education, treatment of addiction, and criminal rehabilitation.
Thus, behaviorism advanced the scientific understanding of behavior in
important ways, including the development of stimulus-response learning
paradigms that remain widely used. It also grounded psychology firmly in
an objective experimental approach. Yet the very strengths of behaviorism
set the stage for its eventual demise. The focus of behaviorists on learning
from rewards led them to ignore other cognitive functions. Although they did
not deny the existence of mental states and the cognitive functions that those
states implied, behaviorists dismissed those states as inappropriate topics for
scientific study, arguing that psychological concepts could be discussed only in
terms of the experimental manipulations that evoked them (a view sometimes
called “operationism”). Ignoring complex mental states made experiments more
tractable but needlessly reduced the scope of psychology by excluding the study
of cognitive functions other than learning.

Cognitive science
In the mid-twentieth century, a confluence of factors revived the legitimacy
of psychological research on cognitive functions. One factor was the advent
of computational science. Research from the burgeoning field of information
theory gave new insights into perception, memory, and motor performance.
An example comes from a study in the 1950s by the psychologist George Miller,
who showed that people are able to represent only about 7 unique items at one
time, a finding often described as the span of “immediate memory.” Yet most
of the experiments Miller reported do not involve the number 7 or memory at
all. Instead, the research focused on basic perceptual tasks—what is now often
called “psychophysics”—whose results were described using computational
terms like “information” and “bits.” In fact, because perceptual judgments
can represent only about 2.5 bits of information, Miller argued that memory

■ 3

4 ■ CHAPTER 1
(A) Behaviorism

Stimulus

Response

(B) Cognitivism

Stimulus

Response

Figure 1.2 Contrasting behaviorist and cognitive approaches to research
(A) Behaviorists tried to explain behavior using only stimuli and responses, avoiding any reference to the underlying mental processes. They did not necessarily deny
the existence of internal mental states, but instead argued that mental states could
not be defined independently of experimental operations (e.g., stimulus-response
relationships). (B) In contrast, cognitive scientists have sought to explain the information processing that intervenes between stimuli and behavior. Those models assume
that cognitive functions (the black arrows in this schematic diagram) act upon stored
information (colored circles), transforming that information in the service of adaptive
behavior.

processes must “recode” more complex stimuli (e.g., the approximately 20 bits
in a 7-digit phone number) into smaller units for cognitive processing. Memory,
for Miller, was not a passive representation of sensory stimuli, but an active
recoding of the information the stimuli carried.
As information theory became instantiated in physical hardware, computers provided a new model for mental processes, one that included symbolic
representations and hidden layers of meaning. The allied field of artificial intelligence suggested that elementary computations could combine in unexpected
ways to support complex reasoning. The metaphor of “mind as computer” soon
became a staple in psychology.
At about the same time, researchers in psychology and the other social sciences
began to reject the simplicity of the behaviorist research agenda and to explore
more complex aspects of mental life (Figure 1.2). Thus, in the 1950s and 1960s,
some leading psychologists challenged the behaviorist concept of operationism, arguing that psychological states and processes exist independently of the
experiments that defined them. Perhaps the most telling blow to behaviorism
was delivered by the linguist Noam Chomsky. In a review of Skinner’s book
Verbal Behavior, Chomsky argued convincingly in 1959 that behaviorism could
never explain the structural and generative properties of mental phenomena
such as human language. More damningly still, he showed that the inferences
drawn by behaviorists could not eliminate psychological states; on the contrary,
their experiments could not account for even simple elements of real-world
behavior. Emboldened by these criticisms, psychologists began to involve more
human participants in their research—although research in non-human animals
is still a major component—and to investigate high-level, conscious processes.
Research on the processes of cognition has since become a large and independent field of study. Many psychologists and others now consider themselves cognitive scientists. The term cognitive science unifies research on mental

COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE: DEFINITIONS, THEMES, AND APPROACHES

processes regardless of the specific topic, experimental approach, method, or
even discipline. It focuses on information processing associated with cognitive
functions (e.g., the chapters of this textbook), and includes research with human
participants, studies in non-human animals, and computational simulation of
cognitive functions. Cognitive scientists come from a variety of disciplines—
cognitive psychology, social psychology, psychiatry, neurobiology, linguistics,
and even philosophy, among others—which introduces a range of perspectives.
These scientists share an interest in characterizing the phenomena and behavior
associated with specific cognitive functions, and in creating cognitive models
that describe the underlying psychological processes.
Cognitive models, like the stimulus-response models created by behaviorists, predict how sensory input leads to some behavioral output. They differ,
however, in that they posit psychological processes and internal states whose
properties are based on factors extrinsic to a specific experiment. Importantly,
the psychological processes invoked in cognitive science models do not necessarily map onto specific physical processes in the brain, and many cognitive
scientists are not especially interested in such mappings. It is enough that the
models make some sense of complex cognitive phenomena, provide insights
into the common outcomes of different experiments, and facilitate generalizations about experimental results.
The elements of cognitive models are sometimes called psychological constructs, in recognition of the fact that they are created to help explain diverse
phenomena without reference to their ultimate causes in the brain. Constructs
play an important role in many scientific disciplines; in particular, they can
spark new and unexpected research directions. For many areas within cognitive
science, careful experimentation and the gradual refinement of psychological
constructs has led to remarkable progress. At the same time, however, many
psychologists recognized that new developments in neuroscience held promise
for grounding psychological constructs in neurobiological processes. Conversely,
many neuroscientists grew increasingly interested in phenomena that had previously been limited to the province of cognitive psychology. How could the study
of cognition be integrated with the methods of neuroscience? And why would
knowing something about the brain improve our understanding of cognitive
functions? Answering these questions requires some understanding of how
neuroscientists approach the study of mental processes using the tools of biology.

Neuroscience
Nervous systems are found in all but the simplest animals. The field of neuroscience is concerned with how the nervous systems of humans and other animals
are organized and function. Early knowledge about nervous system function
came primarily from clinical cases and took a relatively holistic view of brain
function (Figure 1.3A,B), although more was known about brain structure (Figure 1.3C). Despite lacking experimental methods, physician-scientists made remarkable inferences about brain function. The imperial Roman physician Galen
had essentially no tools other than careful observation, yet he recognized that
damage to the brain could have effects on cognition, and he took steps to protect the brains of his patients during surgery. The state of knowledge changed
only slowly over the succeeding centuries: physicians knew that cognition
was generated by the brain, but they lacked ways to systematically investigate
cognition or to heal its deficits.
By the early nineteenth century, physicians with a scientific bent had become
particularly interested in the functional properties of the cerebral cortex. It was
by then clear that damage to the cerebrum from war wounds and other causes
led to a variety of effects. Some individuals seemed little affected by cerebral

■ 5

6 ■ CHAPTER 1
(A)

(B)

(D)

XXVII

VI

XX

IV
XXV

IX

X

XXIV

XX

II

VI
II

XV

XI

(C)

XV XX

XX

III

I

I

XV

VI

I

II

XV

XI

X

V

IV
II

I

Figure 1.3 Early depictions of the brain (A) In his brain dissections, Italian artist
and polymath Leonardo da Vinci injected hot wax into the ventricular cavities, which
allowed him to make some of the earliest descriptions of those fluid-filled structures.
In line with the ideas of many of his contemporaries in the Renaissance, Leonardo
mapped different functions onto different parts of the ventricular system. (Drawings
circa 1508.) (B) René Descartes likewise believed that the ventricles were critical for
brain function, in that they contained psychic “spirits” that flowed from the pineal
gland (shown here in a drawing from 1662). In his framework, the single pineal gland
was the seat of the mind. Note, however, that this simplistic view of brain function
belies Descartes’ keen eye for brain structure (C). (D) As described in the text, the
phrenological maps devised by Franz Joseph Gall in the early nineteenth century
supposed that the bony protrusions on the skull indicated the relative strength of
functions such as the “reproductive instinct” (I) and “firmness of purpose” (XXVII).

damage, while others had selective deficits of one faculty; and still others were
greatly impaired by what seemed like minimal damage. The German physician
and anatomist Franz Joseph Gall had long suspected that differences among
individuals in their cognitive functions and personality traits were associated
with different parts of the cerebral cortex, and he hypothesized that the size of

COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE: DEFINITIONS, THEMES, AND APPROACHES

■ 7

the cerebral cortex (and thus the extent of the function or trait) could be mapped
by measuring bumps on the overlying skull (Figure 1.3D).
Gall’s hypothesis led to a new approach to studying brain function called
phrenology. The phrenologists in the first half of the nineteenth century mapped
the skulls of ordinary people, scholars, patients in mental hospitals, and even
non-human animals. From these measurements, they constructed detailed maps
that assigned different functions and traits—memory, color vision, vanity, moral
fiber, and many others—to different parts of the cortex. Over the succeeding
decades, phrenology faded as it gradually became clear that the measurements
of the skull made by Gall and his followers bore no relation to the underlying
structure of the brain, let alone its function. Although the term phrenologist is
nowadays applied dismissively to someone who describes the brain in nonscientific
terms, phrenology made an important contribution to modern neuroscience: it
introduced the idea that different parts of the brain contribute to different sorts
of information processing. This idea is now known as localization of function.
Only in the second half of the nineteenth century did rigorous experimental
approaches to neuroscience begin to flourish, typically as physiological research
in non-human animals or in brain tissue that was examined with rapidly
developing techniques of microscopy and cell staining. The identification of
neurons (Figure 1.4) as separate cells by the Spanish neuroanatomist Santiago
Ramón y Cajal in the decades just before the turn of the twentieth century was
a major turning point. This finding implied that cognitive processes are carried
out by large populations of neurons.
Parallel and indeed earlier work on the electrical properties of neurons
showed that signals are transmitted long distances along neuronal axons by
action potentials. By the early twentieth century, researchers had developed
recording techniques that could track changes in these electrical signals, and

(A)

(B)
Mitochondrion

Endoplasmic
reticulum

Dendrites
Nucleus
Cell body

Dendrite

Cell
body

Golgi
apparatus

Synapse
Axon

Figure 1.4 The neuron (A) A photograph of cortical neurons that
have been stained using modern versions of the methods developed by
Santiago Ramón y Cajal. (B) Neurons have three basic parts: (1) a cell
body that contains the nucleus and most of the neuron’s metabolic
machinery; (2) an axon that carries information to other cells via its synaptic
endings; and (3) multiple dendrites that receive inputs from synapses with
other nerve cells. (A courtesy of A.-S. LaMantia and D. Purves.)

Ribosomes
Axon

8 ■ CHAPTER 1
they had begun to explore the chemical substances that neurons use to stimulate
the cells they contact. These neurotransmitters are now known to be released by
the terminals of neuronal axons at specialized contacts called synapses, where
the transmitters then bind to receptor molecules on target neurons and other
cells, thus altering the membrane potential of the cell contacted. The action of
neurotransmitters at synapses was soon understood to be the major way that
information travels between cells in nervous systems. Understanding how neurotransmitters contribute to brain function remains an important goal for both
basic and clinical neuroscience. Moreover, the signaling processes of neurons
require energy derived from oxygen and metabolites supplied by the vascular
system, and measurements of increased energy consumption and blood flow
in active brain regions provide the bases for the imaging methods essential to
many brain studies today, as will be described in Chapter 2.
By the early twentieth century, neuroscientists possessed the experimental
techniques for addressing questions about functional localization in a rigorous
way as evident in the pioneering studies of functional localization and reflex
circuitry in experimental animals by the English physiologist Charles Sherrington.
The translation of this work to humans came from studies by neurosurgeons
like Wilder Penfield, who sought better ways of mapping the cerebral cortex in
order to minimize the damage to normal brain tissue as he removed a tumor or
a focus of epileptic seizures. At the outset of a neurosurgical session, Penfield
applied weak electrical currents to the exposed cerebral cortex of the patient.
When current was delivered to the cortex immediately behind the central sulcus, a patient might report feeling a tap on the finger or a brushing sensation
on the leg. Changing the location of stimulation and monitoring the resulting
sensations allowed Penfield to create a systematic map of the somatosensory

(A)
Area 1

Figure 1.5 Mapping function in
the human primary somatosensory
cortex (A) Shown in color are key
regions of the primary and secondary
somatosensory cortex. (B) Electrical
stimulation of these regions of the
cerebral cortex—in the brains of
patients undergoing neurosurgery
in advance of epilepsy surgery—
evokes sensations whose perceived
location depends on the part of
cortex being stimulated. Stimulations
near the top of the brain generated
sensations perceived to arise in
the feet and legs, while stimulation
on the side of the brain led to sensations in the face and lips. (C) This
smaller reconstruction of the body (or
“homunculus”) portrays the size of
each body region proportionally to its
representation in the somatosensory
cortex. Note that the amount of
somatosensory cortex devoted to
the hands and face is much larger
than the relative body surface in
these regions. (After Penfield and
Rasmussen 1950; Corsi 1996.)

Primary
somatosensory
cortex (S1)

Area 2
Area 3a
Area 3b

Secondary
somatosensory
cortex (S2)

Trunk
Neck
Head
Shoulder
Arm
Elbow
Forearm

(B)

Medial

Leg
Foot
Toes
Genitalia

Hand
Digit 5
4
3
2
Thumb
Eyes
Nose
Face
Upper lip
Lower lip
Chin

Throat
Tongue
Teeth, jaw, gums
Lateral

(C)

COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE: DEFINITIONS, THEMES, AND APPROACHES

cortex (Figure 1.5); the same approach revealed the organization of the motor
cortex, as well as some of the structural organization of the frontal lobes.
Electrical stimulation, however, was only one of the many approaches eventually used by modern neuroscience. Studies of cellular physiology revealed
how single neurons change their firing rate in response to specific information,
as in the exquisite sensitivity of neurons in primary visual cortex to a bar of
light moving through a particular part of visual space. Clinical neuroscience
has now shown that neurological conditions such as Parkinson’s disease and
Alzheimer’s disease reflect specific cellular problems, while psychiatric disorders such as depression arise from neurotransmitter dysfunction, which has
led to the development of a plethora of drugs that have proved to be effective
treatments. Against this impressive backdrop, the study of cognition represents
only a small component of a much larger field.

Cognitive Neuroscience: The Neurobiological
Approach to Cognition
Cognitive neuroscience is defined by work at the intersection of cognitive science
and neuroscience. Thus, cognitive neuroscientists must have grounding in both
of these domains. They must be able to think about the cognitive processes that
shape our behavior and the contents of our mental lives, and understand cognitive psychology and related fields. But they must also be able to relate those
processes and theories to underlying brain function, which requires proficiency
in the key findings and the tools of neuroscience. Cognitive neuroscience thus
combines all the difficulties of measuring brain function with all the problems
of trying to accurately assess cognition and behavior, as well as the complexities
of trying to link them together. These goals distinguish cognitive neuroscience
from other disciplines—chemistry, physics, and molecular biology, to name a
few—whose boundaries are better defined.
This interdisciplinary nature of the field can cause problems. For example,
one common misconception is that cognitive neuroscience simply maps the
brain regions that are activated during a psychological process, in what is sometimes called the search for neural correlates of cognition. Popular descriptions
of cognitive neuroscience research often feed into this misconception when
they describe the research approach as putting someone in an MRI scanner
to find the brain region that supports morality, forgetfulness, or impulsiveness. Nonetheless, understanding the neural correlates of a function plays an
important role. For example, when researchers showed that prefrontal cortex
neurons increase their firing rate while information is held in memory, that
new knowledge sparked research on the role of that brain region in a range of
executive processes. It should be clear, however, that the ambitions of cognitive
neuroscience go well beyond creating maps of brain function.
Much current research combines information about brain structure and function to create neurobiologically grounded models of cognition. For some cognitive
functions, the contributions of neuroscience have been obvious and dramatic.
Models of perception and of motor control have been transformed by findings
from neuroscience, and it is impossible to consider how these functions work
without reference to what is now known of their underlying neural substrates.
For other cognitive functions as well, evidence from neuroscience has shaped the
direction of ongoing debates in the field. For example, research on attention had
long debated the issue of whether attention filters perceptual stimuli at initial
stages of processing, before features of a stimulus are integrated into a percept,
or only later, after perceptual processing is largely complete. By recording brain
activity while participants performed attention tasks, investigators eventually
obtained clear evidence that attentional filters operate at both levels.

■ 9

10 ■ CHAPTER 1
The development of cognitive neuroscience models also has important practical applications. An example is studies of individual differences. Understanding
how and why people differ in their cognitive abilities is a major area of research
in psychology, medicine, and epidemiology. By linking individual differences in
cognition to individual differences in brain function, researchers have begun to
understand the neural bases for both typical and atypical cognition at any stage of
the human life span. Differences in cognitive abilities can provide a link between
genes and behavior as well. Many of the genes that bear on individual variation in
cognitive functions presumably exert their effects by altered expression in specific
brain systems. Understanding how these different systems interact to support
particular function can guide genomic analyses in health and disease states.
In summary, cognitive neuroscience seeks to create biologically grounded
models of cognitive function. Such models draw inspiration from prior work
in cognitive science, while accommodating new developments and findings
in neuroscience. As a result, cognitive neuroscience models can inform and
constrain prior cognitive science models, and point out new directions for
neuroscience research.

Methods: Convergence and Complementarity
By combining elements of cognitive science and neuroscience, cognitive neuroscience gains access to a wealth of research techniques. It can take advantage
of the diverse paradigms of cognitive scientists, some employing very simple
and controlled experiments while others evoke more natural and open-ended
behavior. It can apply any of the various neuroscience methods appropriate for
measuring or manipulating the physiological processes described in the previous section: the electrical signaling of neurons, the activity of neurotransmitters,
and their supporting metabolic processes.
The experimental and methodological diversity allows cognitive neuroscientists to explore a given topic in many different ways—and it provides many
paths for beginning researchers to explore in their careers. Yet methodological
diversity is not necessarily an advantage. Each new experimental paradigm or
neuroscience technique presents a new set of challenges, any of which may serve
as a barrier to entry for new researchers. Why do we need so many research
methods? Wouldn’t progress be faster if we focused on one technique and then
used only that technique to study all aspects of cognition? The answer to both
questions is simple. Using multiple methods provides two critical advantages:
convergence and complementarity.
Convergence describes the approach of combining results from multiple
experimental paradigms to illuminate a single theoretical concept. This approach
long predates cognitive neuroscience. Renaissance scholars recognized that
scientific progress could be made not simply by recording facts about the world,
but by developing new theories that combined a number of disparate insights into
a common framework. More recently, the application of converging methods to
psychology helped shift that field away from behaviorism. As described earlier
in this chapter, many psychologists believed that behaviorist research was too
sterile: its focus on stimulus-response relationships omitted many of the most
interesting aspects of our internal mental lives. No matter what experiment a
psychologist conducted, a strident behaviorist could explain the experiment’s
results by postulating a new stimulus-response relationship—and that relationship, considered in isolation, would be a more parsimonious explanation than a
theory that assumed an internal state. But how could psychologists demonstrate
the existence of internal mental states that could not be measured directly?
The answer came from convergence: Suppose the cognitive psychologist ran
experiment after experiment, each using different stimuli and methods, and
all of the experiments converged on a similar conclusion. Any one experiment

COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE: DEFINITIONS, THEMES, AND APPROACHES

could be called into question, but the set of experiments would be much more
difficult to reject.
Research in cognitive neuroscience requires the same sort of convergence across
paradigms. Suppose that “social cognition,” which will be introduced in Chapter
11, is the topic of interest. To evoke the relevant cognitive processes, a cognitive
neuroscientist might create an experiment in which participants view videos of
people engaged in social interactions and then think about what those people
are themselves thinking. Would observing activation in one brain region, like the
lateral parietal cortex, mean that the function of the region was social cognition?
No, because a single experiment cannot uniquely identify a cognitive function.
Viewing videos of social interactions may engage processes related to social
perception, selective attention, recognition memory, and emotion, among many.
The diversity of cognitive processes engaged by even a simple task may
seem like a fundamental limitation—and it does make it more difficult for
cognitive neuroscientists to apply results from a single experiment to real-world
problems. But when the same result is observed across a range of experimental
tasks (e.g., consistent activation in lateral parietal cortex in different social
cognition tasks), then that commonality leads to a stronger inference than
could be drawn from any one experiment. Convergence is often facilitated by
meta-analytic methods (Box 1A), which are becoming increasingly central to
cognitive neuroscience research.
Cognitive neuroscience also benefits from the complementarity of its research
methods, each of which provides a different sort of information about brain
function. Because brain function is expressed through many diverse physiological changes, cognitive neuroscientists use a welter of research methods
that provide insight into different aspects of physiology: functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI), electroencephalography (EEG), positron emission
tomography (PET), transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), single-neuron
recording, neurological disorders, lesion studies, assessments of behavior, and
others. None of these techniques provide a complete accounting of brain function.
As will be considered in more detail in Chapter 2, measurement techniques
vary widely in the aspects of brain function they record (Figure 1.6). Some
techniques provide information about brain metabolism (PET) and blood

■ 11

Figure 1.6 Neuroscience techniques
differ in their spatial and temporal
resolution The vertical axes illustrate
spatial resolution in terms of distance
(left) and the corresponding brain
structures (right). The horizontal
axis illustrates temporal resolution.
This graph demonstrates that
different techniques provide different
advantages and disadvantages.
Techniques that involve data
collection from human participants
tend to operate at relatively coarser
spatial scales than those that
record from non-human animals.
Electrophysiological techniques that
provide excellent temporal resolution
in human participants (e.g., scalp
ERPs) have the disadvantage of
relatively lower spatial resolution
compared to neuroimaging techniques
(e.g., functional MRI). As will be
discussed extensively in Chapter 2,
cognitive neuroscience research often
applies a range of techniques to a
single experimental question. EEG,
electroencephalography; ERPs, eventrelated potentials; fMRI, functional
magnetic resonance imaging; MEG,
magnetoencephalography; PET,
positron emission tomography; TMS,
transcranial magnetic stimulation.

1m
Brain

Scalp ERPs

10 cm

TMS
MEG
Human optical

1 cm

EEG
Gyrus
Voxel
(fMRI)

Lesion (animal)

fMRI

Human intracranial ERPs

Lesion
(human)

Drug
manipulations

PET

1 mm
Cortical
column

Animal optical techniques
100 μm

Neuron

Single-unit recording

10 μm

1 μm

Axon
(diameter)

Patch-clamp recording

Synapse
0.1 μm
1 ms

10 ms

100 ms

1s

1 min

1 hr

1 day

1 wk

1 yr

12 ■ CHAPTER 1

■ BOX 1A CONVERGENCE THROUGH META-ANALYSIS

C

for these new brain imaging techniques.
cognitive neuroscience literature. The
ognitive neuroscience has grown
Although this example focused on neufirst is qualitative meta-analysis, in which
dramatically over the past several
roimaging techniques, its methods could
a research team first identifies a comdecades. Every year thousands of
accommodate any approach in cognitive
prehensive set of studies on the same
new studies are published, spanning all of
neuroscience.
cognitive function and then looks for
the research methods and cognitive funcIn the second of the primary meta-ansimilarities among their results. Most
tions described throughout this textbook.
alytic approaches, researchers use quanThe diversity of current research illustrates review articles approach the cognitive
neuroscience literature in this manner. An titative meta-analyses to combine results
how cognitive neuroscience has grown
from multiple studies into a single statistiearly example summarized 275 studies
into a vibrant, mature discipline. Yet this
cal framework. In recent years, quantitathat used PET and fMRI to study cognisuccess points to an important challenge:
tive approaches have been extensively
tive functions (Table A). That number
How can researchers integrate results
applied to functional and structural MRI
seems small compared to the vast exfrom many studies to improve their inferdata. In a typical analysis technique—
panse of the current literature, but at the
ences about cognitive functions?
now often called activation likelihood
time of this article’s publication (2000), it
Methods for combining informarepresented a major fraction of functional estimation—coordinates of fMRI activation across multiple studies are called
tion found in many studies are extracted
neuroimaging research. For each study,
meta-analysis techniques (i.e., “analyand used to create a probabilistic map
the authors identified the type of function
ses of analyses”). While meta-analyses
of the combined data (Figure B). Brain
studied and the task used (e.g., “Pernow play an important role in all scientific
regions that are reliably activated across
ception: face matching”) and then the
disciplines, they have several particularly
many studies have high significance
specific brain region in which activation
important advantages for cognitive neuvalues and are highlighted on the overlaid
was observed. Each of the major cogniroscience. Most generally, they improve
color maps. Quantitative analyses of this
tive functions exhibited a characteristic
the power and precision with which resort can improve statistical power, as
pattern of results, providing validation
searchers can detect and specify conclusions. Nearly all studies in cognitive
neuroscience involve relatively
(A)
small samples; typical are electrophysiological studies of 2 to
Perception of Faces
3 monkeys, neuropsychological
Occipitotesting of a handful of patients
Temporal
temporal
with brain lesions, and functional
MRI or EEG recording from 20 to
38
Ins 42
22
21
20
Mt
37
19
18
17
STUDY
30 research subjects. By combining data across multiple studies,
Grady et al. 1994
x
x
x
researchers increase the effective
Haxby et al. 1994
x
x
sample size for their analyses, allowing the identification of effects
Haxby et al. 1995
x
x
x
that replicate across studies.
Sergent et al. 1992
x
x
The advantages of metaanalyses go well beyond simple
N. Kapur et al. 1995
x
x
x
x
replication. Because different
cognitive neuroscientists always
Puce et al. 1995
x
x
x
approach a research question in
Clark et al. 1996
x
different ways—through different
experimental tasks or different
Puce et al. 1996
x
x
methods for data collection—any
single study’s results might be
Kanwisher et al. 1997
x
attributable to an idiosyncratic
McCarthy et al. 1997
x
feature of its experiment. Those
idiosyncratic features (e.g., the
Clark et al. 1998
x
specific demographics of a subject sample) will average out over
Source: CABEZA AND NYBERG 2000.
many studies, leaving only what is
(A) Qualitative meta-analyses. Meta-analyses combine data from many studies to facilitate stronger
common to all the studies. Thus,
inferences than could be drawn from any one study in isolation. An early approach to meta-analysis
meta-analyses may be especially
relied on the authors’ matching experimental tasks from specific studies (left column) to subregions of
important for understanding the
the brain, represented here by numbers corresponding to Brodmann areas within the cerebral cortex
neural basis of complex cogniand by abbreviations for other brain regions: ins, insula; mt, medial temporal/hippocampus. As shown,
tive functions that can be evoked
a variety of tasks involving the visual perception of human faces evoked activation in a region of the
within a wide range of contexts.
ventral temporal lobe (Brodmann area 37, which includes the fusiform gyrus), although other regions
Three primary approaches
were found to be activated in different studies. (After Cabeza and Nyberg 2000.)
to meta-analysis dominate the

COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE: DEFINITIONS, THEMES, AND APPROACHES

■ 13

■ BOX 1A (continued)
(B)

References
CABEZA, R. AND L. NYBERG (2000) Imaging
cognition II: An empirical review of 275
PET and fMRI studies. J. Cogn. Neurosci.
12: 1–47.

(B) Quantitative meta-analyses. This screen shot from the
NeuroSynth meta-analysis program (http://neurosynth.org)
combines maps of activation coordinates reported in many
hundreds of experiments, each of which was coded according
to the specific cognitive functions it evoked. Shown are three
cross sections through the meta-analytic map for “decision
making,” which combined data from more than 40 studies
that explored different aspects of that function. Consistently
activated in those studies were the insula (at crosshair) and
basal ganglia, each of which will be discussed in more detail
in Chapter 14.

described previously, but also can distinguish subtle functional differences within
a brain region. In addition, their need for
only minimal human input increases their
objectivity. Some cognitive neuroscience
researchers have begun to create automated systems that can evaluate many
hundreds of studies, allowing a keywordbased search of the larger literature (see
http://neurosynth.org).
Finally, semantic (or ontological) metaanalyses combine studies according to
similarity in their underlying concepts. In
the growing area called scientometrics,
meta-analytic methods are applied to
the text content and citations of research articles. Patterns of co-citations
(e.g., articles on working memory tend
to also cite articles on executive function) or of co-occurrences of terms in
articles can be used to identify relationships between concepts, which in turn
can be combined into semantic maps of
the literature. Even more ambitious are
approaches that attempt to break down
complex cognitive functions into their
core processes, on the basis of prior
research, and then separate activation
associated with each of those processes
(see http://cognitiveatlas.org for an example). As will be discussed throughout
this book, the major cognitive functions
(e.g., executive control) can often be
separated into several processes (e.g.,
response inhibition, task switching), and
different executive control tasks may tap

EICKHOFF, S. B., A. R. LAIRD, C. GREFKES, L.
E. WANG, K. ZILLES AND P. T. FOX (2009)
Coordinate-based activation likelihood
estimation meta-analysis of neuroimaging
data: A random-effects approach based on
empirical estimates of spatial uncertainty.
Hum. Brain Mapp. 30: 2907–2926.
POLDRACK, R. A. (2006) Can cognitive
processes be inferred from neuroimaging
data? Trends Cogn. Sci. 10: 59–63.
POLDRACK, R. A., Y. O. HALCHENKO AND S.
J. HANSON (2009) Decoding the large-scale
structure of brain function by classifying
mental states across individuals. Psychol.
Sci. 20: 1364–1372.

into different sets of processes. By examining data across many distinct tasks,
researchers can identify brain regions or
functional networks that tend to load on
specific processes (Figure C).
(C)

(C) Semantic meta-analyses. Eight common psychological tasks were coded according to the
cognitive functions they required (e.g., working memory, decision making, response inhibition).
Then, multivariate pattern analyses (see Chapter 2) were used to identify networks of brain
regions that were consistently activated together and that were associated with similar combinations of cognitive functions. The network shown here—which includes the basal ganglia,
hippocampus, and medial prefrontal cortex—was most activated in tasks that involved decision making and executive function, particularly when dealing with information held in memory.
The size of the words above the images indicated the relative association between this network
and each cognitive function; for example, this network has stronger links to functions such as
decision making and memory than to functions such as speech and reasoning. (From Poldrack
et al. 2009.)

14 ■ CHAPTER 1
oxygenation (fMRI) induced by neural activity. Others indicate how single
neurons send information (single-unit recording) or integrate information from
other neurons (local field potentials and EEG). And the techniques vary in
whether they are more sensitive to rapid changes in brain activity or to slower
changes, and whether they collect information from single neurons, small portions of the brain, or the brain as a whole. Perturbation techniques (TMS, drug
administration, lesion studies), by contrast, alter brain function, and thus can
be used to evaluate how specific brain regions or systems contribute causally
to specific cognitive processes. Each technique carries distinct strengths and
limitations, so the results obtained from multiple techniques are much more
compelling than results derived from only a single approach.
Every subsequent chapter will highlight the ways in which multiple experimental paradigms and research methods combine to provide a richer
understanding of the neural basis of cognition. Even though many aspects
of cognition may at first seem particular to human cognitive function (e.g.,
language or reasoning), research using animal models often informs research
in human participants, and vice versa. Convergence and complementarity also
apply across research topics. Often there are striking commonalities in the sets
of brain regions engaged by seemingly different sorts of tasks (e.g., selective
visual attention and decision making), which can spur researchers to investigate processes that might be common across domains of cognition. Cognitive
neuroscientists must develop facility with a variety of research methods, even
if they do not use all (or even most) of those methods in their own research.

Conclusions
Cognitive neuroscience provides a rich opportunity for students, despite the
inherent complexity of human mental life and the need to develop some familiarity with the strengths and limitations of many different technical approaches.
Given its remarkable breadth, exploring cognitive neuroscience in a textbook
is a daunting task. To make the job manageable, this book takes an explicitly
student-centered approach. Each chapter includes fundamental background
material, as well as examples of recent developments in the field. The sequence
of cognitive functions progresses from basic perceptual and attentional processes, through memory and emotions, to executive processes, decision making,
and finally evolution and development. There is ample coverage of research
methods, and how conclusions about cognitive function are best understood
by applying multiple experimental approaches and considering a variety of
data. The aim in every chapter is to describe how cognitive neuroscience has
extended the scientific scope of both cognitive psychology and neuroscience.
As authors, our primary goal is to help students gain an appreciation of
the intellectual and methodological principles of this exciting new discipline,
which combines many of the best qualities of the social and natural sciences.
By understanding the approach of cognitive neuroscience and its conclusions,
students will gain a deeper understanding of the cognitive capabilities that
define human beings.

COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE: DEFINITIONS, THEMES, AND APPROACHES

■ 15

Summary
1. Cognitive science seeks to understand the information processing associated with
functions like perception, memory, and decision making.
2. Neuroscience seeks to characterize the structure and function of the nervous
system.
3. Cognitive neuroscience is a new discipline that applies research methods from
neuroscience to the functions and behaviors studied by cognitive science.
4. Cognitive neuroscientists use diverse research methods and experimental paradigms to develop models of mental function and behavior.

Additional Reading
Important Original Papers
CHOMSKY, N. (1959) A review of B. F.
Skinner’s Verbal Behavior. Language 35:
56–58.
GARNER, W. R., H. W. HAKE AND C. W.
ERIKSEN (1956) Operationism and the
concept of perception. Psychol. Rev. 63:
149–159.

MILLER, G. A. (1956) The magical number
seven, plus or minus two: Some limits
on our capacity for processing information. Psychol. Rev. 3: 81–97.

Books
FINGER, S. (1994) Origins of Neuroscience.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
PURVES, D., G. J. AUGUSTINE, D. FITZPATRICK, W. C. HALL, A.-S. LAMANTIA AND

Go to the COMPANION WEBSITE
sites.sinauer.com/cogneuro2e
for quizzes, animations, flashcards,
and other study resources.

L. E. WHITE (2012) Neuroscience, 5th Ed.
Sunderland, MA: Sinauer.
SKINNER, B. F. (1938) The Behavior
of Organisms. New York:
Appleton-Century-Crofts.

