2
The Methods of
Cognitive Neuroscience
INTRODUCTION
As introduced in Chapter 1, the goal of cognitive neuroscience is to
explain cognitive processes and behavior in terms of the structure and
function of the brain and the rest of the nervous system. A critical contribution of cognitive psychology has been to emphasize the importance of
measuring behavioral responses during cognitive and perceptual tasks
as a means of inferring what transpires as the nervous system translates
stimuli into appropriate actions, thoughts, and other behaviors. By
applying these psychological paradigms in conjunction with neuroscience techniques and methods, investigators have increasingly been able
to directly relate the biology of brain functions to the mental functions
studied by cognitive scientists. These findings in turn help constrain and
guide cognitive models of behavior, as part of a synergistic interplay
between the fields that form the central core of cognitive neuroscience.
Neuroscience-based approaches can be divided into two broad
categories: (1) studying changes in cognitive behavior when the brain
has been perturbed in some way, and (2) measuring brain activity while
cognitive tasks are being performed (Figure 2.1). For the first of these
approaches, disturbances of brain function due to clinical brain lesions
resulting from stroke, trauma, or disease have been enormously useful
for investigating the role of the brain in specific cognitive processes.
In addition, methods that employ pharmacological and electrical perturbations of brain function, including those applied in a temporary
fashion, have also been used to great advantage in both human subjects
and experimental animals (see Introductory Box). The second main
approach—that of measuring brain activity while a subject is engaged
in a specific cognitive task—takes advantage of a variety of currently
available electrophysiological and imaging techniques in both humans
and animals. Both of these approaches have altered and accelerated our
understanding of the mechanisms underlying the higher brain functions
that are the focus of cognitive neuroscience.

18 ■ CHAPTER 2

■ INTRODUCTORY BOX EARLY BRAIN MAPPING IN HUMANS

O

ne of the earliest methods used
to directly examine cognitive
brain function in humans was
intracranial electrical stimulation in patients. Although intracranial stimulation
techniques are highly invasive, they are
sometimes used in humans to enable
neurosurgeons to map the functions
of brain regions on or near the site of
a tumor, suspected epileptic focus, or
other lesion that needs to be dealt with
surgically. Because there are no pain receptors in brain tissue, such stimulation
mapping can be performed on awake,
responsive patients.
As mentioned briefly in Chapter 1, one
of the first scientists to use electrical stimulation in this way was the neurosurgeon
Wilder Penfield (Figure A), who in 1934
established the Montreal Neurological
Institute with support from the Rockefeller
Foundation. With his colleague Herbert
Jasper, Penfield developed procedures
for treating patients with severe epilepsy
by destroying the brain tissue in the regions where the seizures originated. Before damaging any cortical tissue, however, he used focal electrical stimulation
to functionally map the region as a way to
better understand the functionality of the
surrounding area. Since the patients were
conscious during the procedure, he was
able to observe their responses and/or
ask about what they were experiencing.
The patients’ responses to the stimulation helped him plan the surgery so that
important brain functionality could be
preserved (Figure B).
Using this focal stimulation technique,
Penfield was able to create maps of the
sensory and motor cortices of the brain.
In particular, he established that each
of these areas contains complete and
separate representations of the various
body parts on the contralateral side of
the body (Figure C). Penfield found that
the layout of these cortical representations followed the general somatotopic
relationships of the different parts of the
body (see Chapters 4 and 5). That is, adjacent body parts generally had adjacent
cortical representations, which together
gave rise to a representational map of
the entire body termed a homunculus
(meaning literally “little man”). One of the
intriguing findings of this work was the
relatively large expanse of cortex dedicated to some body parts, such as the
face and hands, relative to others. This is
presumed to reflect the need for higher
detail of representation for these parts.
These findings of the neural representation of contralateral parts of the body
in the sensory and motor cortices have

been mostly confirmed by numerous
studies since, using a variety of different
methods.
Penfield also reported intriguing effects of stimulating other regions, such
as parts of the temporal lobes, where
seizures often originate. These effects
included both auditory perceptions and
the vivid recall of memories. For example, he recorded that “stimulation of
a point on the anterior part of the first
temporal lobe on the right” caused one
patient to remember being at a very
specific location—namely, “South Bend,
Indiana, corner of Jacob and Washington”—and to be “looking at himself at a
younger age.” Other stimulation triggered
memories of music from the Broadway
musical Guys and Dolls. Although these
triggered memories could vary substantially even when the same region was
stimulated at different times, the specificity of the memories induced was quite

(A)

striking. Moreover, these observations
are consistent with the conclusions in
Chapters 8 and 9 that long-term memories are stored in the cerebral cortex.

References
PENFIELD, W. AND H. JASPER (1954) Epilepsy
and the Functional Anatomy of the Human
Brain, 2nd Ed. Oxford: Little, Brown.
PENFIELD, W. AND T. RASMUSSEN (1950)
The Cerebral Cortex of Man: A Clinical
Study of Localization of Function. Oxford:
Macmillan.

Early mapping of cortical brain function in
humans using intracranial stimulation. (A)
Neurosurgeon Wilder Penfield. (B) An original
photo of the exposed brain of one of Penfield’s patients, labeled with stimulation locations. (C) The layout of the representations
in the somatosensory (left panel) and motor
(right panel) cortices of the body parts on the
contralateral side of the body. (Courtesy of
the Osler Library of the History of Medicine,
McGill University.)

(B)

Primary
somatosensory
cortex

(C)

Primary
motor
cortex

THE METHODS OF COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE
(A) Brain perturbation approach
Measure task performance

Perturbation of brain

Cognition

Brain

(B) Neuromonitoring approach
Manipulate cognitive process

Measure neural variable

Cognition

Brain

■ 19

Figure 2.1 Two main approaches for linking cognitive functions and neural processes (A) In the first approach, the brain
is perturbed in some way—either by a clinical disorder (e.g.,
stroke, disease, trauma) or by directed, planned interference
(injected drugs, electrical stimulation)—and task performance on
a set of cognitive tasks is measured. (B) In the neuromonitoring
approach, an experimenter manipulates a particular cognitive
process in an experimental task and measures the associated
changes in brain activity.

Brain Perturbations That Elucidate Cognitive Functions
Perturbations of the brain that impair or otherwise influence cognitive functions
can come about through a variety of mechanisms. Such perturbations often
derive from brain damage in patients due to stroke, trauma, or disease, but they
can also be induced experimentally using methods that employ pharmacological
or electrical methods. Information from both of these ways by which normal
brain operations can be disrupted have greatly advanced our understanding
of the neural underpinnings of cognitive functions.

Perturbations imposed by stroke, trauma, or disease
The technique of clinical-pathological correlations is the oldest method for
understanding the neural basis of cognitive function and has been a mainstay
of neurology and neurosurgery for more than a century. A major advantage of
this approach is that if damage to a brain area or system disrupts a cognitive
function, it is likely that the damaged region is involved in some critical way
in the performance of that function.
This approach was first accomplished by correlating a patient’s signs, symptoms, and behavior during life with the location of brain lesions discovered upon
autopsy. Brain lesions can arise from a stroke that damages a particular region
of cortex, from traumatic injury, from a tumor, or from various brain diseases.
Many examples of clinical-pathological correlations are considered in later
chapters, including the seminal work that associated language functions with
specific regions in the left hemisphere (see Chapter 12); studies that associated
frontal lobe damage with deficits in planning and judgment (see Chapter 14);
and studies that have provided fundamental insights into the neural basis of
perception (see Chapters 3 and 4), attentional control (see Chapter 7), memory
(see Chapters 8 and 9), and emotion (see Chapter 10).
A major limitation of clinical-pathological correlations in humans, however,
is that the brain damage is the result of many factors that are not under the
control of the experimenter. In the case of strokes, for example, these factors
include which specific artery was blocked, which brain area(s) that artery
supplied, whether other arteries were still able to supply some blood to the
affected area, and how long ago the stroke occurred. Although stroke-induced
lesions can be relatively focal, they follow vascular-supply boundaries rather
than being restricted to functional brain regions, and thus a single lesion can
have diverse effects on cognitive functions.
Moreover, the distribution of brain regions supporting cognitive functions
varies among individuals, making it difficult to generalize results. This variability can be addressed to some degree by combining information about the

20 ■ CHAPTER 2
Left dorsal prefrontal

0

100%

Figure 2.2 Combining information across subjects helps to localize the brain
region underlying a cognitive deficit These images show the areas of damage
determined from structural magnetic resonance brain images (see Box 2A) for eight
patients with a common cognitive loss (the prefrontal syndrome described in Chapter
13). Each row shows the extent of damage for a given patient; each column represents a comparable level in the brain, from inferior on the left to superior on the right.
The bottom row shows the area of brain damage the eight subjects have in common. The scale indicates the percentage of subjects with damage in each location.
This sort of analysis helps specify the brain region that is critical to a given function.
(Courtesy of Robert T. Knight.)

locus of damage across a group of patients, allowing researchers to delineate
the affected region that is common to the loss of a particular function (Figure
2.2). The region of overlap among a group of patients more accurately defines
the part of the brain relevant to the cognitive function at issue. Notably, only
with the advent of modern brain imaging techniques did this approach of collating information concerning the overlapping of brain lesions into a common
space become very practical or accurate.
Another way researchers have defined the relationship between brain
damage and resulting deficits in cognitive functions is by making restricted
electrolytic or surgical lesions in experimental animals, including non-human
primates. This approach allows the researcher to control the location and extent
of brain damage, limiting it to specific functional areas. There are, however,

THE METHODS OF COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE

some disadvantages to this approach as well. The training and assessment
of animals carrying out cognitive tasks is considerably more difficult than
for similar studies in humans, and making deliberate lesions in the brains of
healthy animals, particularly non-human primates, can raise ethical concerns.
Nevertheless, the use of carefully controlled brain lesions in experimental
animals has provided useful information complementing that derived from
neuropsychological studies in humans.
Lesion studies, whether in humans or in animals, also present problems
of interpretation. The mammalian brain is a highly interconnected structure.
If one area of the brain is lesioned, other areas of the brain innervated by the
damaged area may, from the loss of input, also cease to function normally. Such
effects, known as diaschisis, can lead to wrongly attributing the lost functionality to the lesioned area rather than to the downstream area. Another possible
misinterpretation of lesion findings is that damage to a cortical area can also
damage nearby fiber tracts, thereby disrupting the function of more distant areas.
Nevertheless, clinical-pathological correlation studies remain highly informative in cognitive neuroscience. Their continued relevance has been greatly
augmented by modern neuroimaging methods that allow brain lesions to be
localized with considerable precision in living patients who are still available
for detailed behavioral testing. Such knowledge of the exact site of a lesion can
inform and guide the behavioral testing in a far more focused way than when
the definitive localization of the lesion could be attained only postmortem. Such
modern methods of imaging brain structure, particularly those using magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), are fundamental to cognitive neuroscience; they are
described in Box 2A. Other sorts of imaging techniques, such as the MRI-based
technique of diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), are being used to delineate the
structural connections of the brain (Box 2B).

Pharmacological perturbations
Another way of perturbing cognitive function in the brain is via pharmacological manipulation. As described in the Appendix, signaling between neurons
involves the release of and response to neurotransmitter molecules at synapses.
Many drugs interfere with or augment these processes and can thereby change
cognitive functions. Cognitive neuroscientists have taken advantage of psychoactive drugs such as caffeine, cocaine, antidepressants, and a host of others to
gain insight into the neuropharmacology of these functions, both in humans
and in experimental animals.
Pharmacological studies in humans have taken two main forms. The first
approach is to examine the influence of chronic drug use or abuse on cognitive
processes, taking advantage of the unfortunate prevalence of these social problems
and the disorders they cause. An example is the set of cognitive impairments
apparent in cocaine addicts, which include changes in reward evaluation (i.e.,
a person’s ability to properly assess the positive or negative value of events
and behaviors). Impaired reward evaluation in turn affects the ability to make
self-protective decisions and to formulate and pursue successful life strategies.
Cocaine and other drugs of abuse lead to specific changes in neurotransmission
in the brain systems that underlie these functions. Cocaine specifically activates
dopamine receptors, altering the physiology of the dopamine system, which is
known to play a major role in reward evaluation (see Chapter 14). Although
the dysfunction that leads to addiction is still not completely understood, the
altered sense of reward associated both with the cocaine “high” and with
cocaine addiction is clear. Chronic use leads to drug tolerance (i.e., the need for
increasing amounts of the drug in order to achieve the same pharmacological
effect), which results in further negative consequences. (On a less problematic
level, this sort of pharmacological adaptation is familiar to habitual coffee

■ 21

22 ■ CHAPTER 2

■ BOX 2A AN INTRODUCTION TO STRUCTURAL BRAIN IMAGING
TECHNIQUES

U

ntil relatively recently, images
of the human brain, whether of
patients or of normal subjects,
provided only limited information to clinicians and researchers. For a long time,
the best noninvasive imaging methodology available used conventional X-ray
techniques, which do not image softtissue structures such as the brain very
well and do not provide three-dimensional image information. Although the addition of vascular contrast agents (dyes
containing radiopaque materials such as
barium salts) improved the visualization
of damaged tissue, the intrinsic two-dimensional nature of conventional X-rays
(i.e., giving a net density through imaged
tissue only at one particular angle) still
limited the anatomical resolution of brain
tissue. Beginning in the 1970s, however,
the development of a variety of imaging
methods that revealed brain structure
(and, somewhat later, brain physiology)
with ever-increasing detail revolutionized
neuroscience, from clinical diagnostics to
research on cognitive processes.
The first technological breakthrough
was the development of computerized
tomography (CT). CT uses a movable
X-ray tube that is rotated around the
patient’s head (Figure A). Rather than
acquiring a single image, as in conventional X-ray images, a CT scan gathers
intensity information gleaned from multiple angles through the imaging volume.
These data are entered into a matrix,
and the radiodensity at each point in the
three-dimensional space of the head
is calculated. Using sensitive detectors
and digital signal-processing techniques,
small differences in radiodensity can be
converted into three-dimensional image
information for the full volume of the
head. In addition, the computed matrix
can generate “slices,” or tomograms
(tomo means “cut” or “slice”), visualizing internal structures in various planes
throughout the brain (Figure A, inset),
transformed to provide views from any
angle. Since many brain structures are
best seen in a particular plane, this ability
is a tremendous advantage.
Today, CT imaging for brain research
purposes has been largely superseded
by magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI; Figure B), although CT remains important in many clinical applications because it is faster and cheaper than MRI
and can be used in some situations in

(A)
X-ray
source

X-ray
detector

which magnetic resonance cannot (e.g.,
in patients with implanted metal devices).
The essentials of the mechanism by
which magnetic resonance produces images can be understood in terms of the
three concepts reflected in the phrase
magnetic resonance imaging itself:
1. Magnetic. Consider a compass
needle. At rest, the needle is aligned
with the Earth’s magnetic field (i.e.,
along a north–south axis). Similarly,
when a person is inside an MRI
scanner, protons in hydrogen atoms
of the brain become aligned with the
very strong main magnetic field of the
scanner. Perturbations with respect to
this alignment provide a source signal
that can be measured, analyzed, and
used to construct an image.

2. Resonance. This difficult concept is
the foundation of MRI. Resonance
refers to the ability of a system
to absorb energy delivered at a
particular frequency. A macroscopic
example is a child on a playground
swing. Given a single push, even a
strong one, the resulting movement
is brief and diminishes quickly. In
contrast, repeated small pushes
at the right frequency (i.e., a push
each time the person on the swing
reaches the apogee of its arc) allows
the system to absorb the imparted
energy effectively, such that the child
will soon be swinging back and forth
with great excursion. In the same
way, protons in a strong magnetic
field will efficiently absorb energy

(A) Computerized tomography. During a CT
scan, an X-ray source is rotated around the
patient’s head while detectors measure the
intensity of the rays transmitted through the
head at each imaged angle. Computer algorithms combine the opacity data from these
multiple imaging angles to reconstruct the
opacity at each point within the volume of
the head. In addition, the detectors used in
CT are more sensitive than conventional film,
thereby allowing shorter imaging times and
less radiation exposure. The CT scan in the
inset shows a horizontal section of a normal
adult brain.

when the energy is delivered at a
particular resonant frequency. During
a process called excitation, the MRI
scanner emits energy in the form of
radio waves at precisely the resonant
frequency of protons. After a few
milliseconds, the radio-wave energy
is turned off, whereupon the protons
begin to release the energy they
absorbed. This released energy—
the MR signal—is measured by
electromagnetic detectors around the
head or other part of the body.
3. Imaging. In order to create an image
from the MR signal, electromagnetic
coils in the scanner can cause
the local magnetic field to differ in
strength along specific directions.
By varying these magnetic-field
gradients in a systematic way along
the x-, y-, and z-axes of the volume
to be imaged, the MR signal is
caused to vary correspondingly
and systematically along these

THE METHODS OF COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE

■ 23

■ BOX 2A (continued)
axes. This complex variation in the
signal emitted by the brain or other
tissue is decoded by sophisticated
computer analysis to create an image
that reflects the proton density,
as well as the distribution of other
tissue characteristics, throughout
the imaged volume. Because these
characteristics are different for gray
matter, white matter, the fluid in the
ventricles, and other neural tissues
(see the Appendix), a great deal of
neuroanatomical detail becomes
apparent.
The spatial resolution of MR images
depends on the strength of the magnetic
field, the strength of the gradient coils,
and the types of images being collected.
Currently, most clinical scanners have field
strengths of 1.5 tesla, which can provide
a structural resolution of 1 millimeter or
less. Research scanners tend to have
field strengths of 3 tesla or higher, often
along with high-performance magnetic
gradient coils that further improve the
structural imaging resolution and contrast.
These enhanced performance characteristics also facilitate the acquisition of highspeed images of functional brain activity,
as described later in the chapter.
It should be apparent from this
description that MRI has a number
of important features that make it an
extraordinarily valuable tool in cognitive
neuroscience. First, it is noninvasive;
subjects are simply exposed to a strong
magnetic field and radio waves that are
generally thought to be harmless to brain
tissues (although patients have been
injured by unsecured ferromagnetic objects being pulled into the MR scanner).
Second, MR images of brain tissue are
of extremely high resolution compared
to those obtainable using other techniques (compare the insets in Figures A

(B)

(B) Magnetic resonance imaging. A typical 1.5-tesla MR scanner is shown. The inset shows a
horizontal MR image of a normal adult brain. Note the extraordinary clarity with which the different soft-tissue types and regions of the brain can be seen, and how much more detail is visible
compared to the CT image in Figure A.

and B for CT and MRI images, respectively). Third, by varying the gradient and
radio-frequency pulse parameters, MRI
scanners can be used to generate images that are sensitive to many different
aspects of brain structure. For example,
certain imaging parameters enable the
acquisition of pictures that delineate gray
matter and white matter in very high
detail. The use of other parameters in the
MR scanning sequence yields images in
which gray and white matter are invisible
but the brain’s vasculature stands out.
Varying yet other parameters enables
measurement of the preferred direction
of water diffusion for each voxel (i.e.,
imaging volume unit) of imaged brain

drinkers, who need more caffeine to achieve the same stimulatory effect than
do people who drink coffee only occasionally.) Studies of the effects of cocaine
have been critical in advancing our understanding of the regions of the brain
and the cellular mechanisms involved in the normal sense of reward.
More controlled pharmacological perturbation can be carried out in experimental settings in which a drug is administered acutely and its effects are
monitored. In this manner it is possible to study, for example, the effects of
nicotine on cognitive functions—another topic that has been of great interest
because of the health implications of smoking. Nicotine affects neurotransmission mediated by acetylcholine, interacting with cognitive processes that include

tissue. Because water tends to diffuse
more along fiber tracts than across them,
this technique—diffusion tensor imaging
(DTI)—enables the imaging of fiber tracts
at very high resolution (see Box 2B).

References
HOUNSFIELD, G. N. (1980) Computed medical imaging. Science 210: 22–28.
HUETTEL, S., A. W. SONG AND G. MCCARTHY (2009) Functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging, 2nd Ed. Sunderland, MA:
Sinauer.
OLDENDORF, W. AND W. OLDENDORF JR.
(1988) Basics of Magnetic Resonance Imaging. Boston: Kluwer Academic.

24 ■ CHAPTER 2

■ BOX 2B IMAGING STRUCTURAL CONNECTIONS IN THE BRAIN

A

n important element for understanding the mechanisms underlying cognitive functions in the brain
is establishing how the different parts
and regions are interconnected and work
together. Accordingly, much work is
continually being devoted to delineating
the structural connections of the brain, at
both the macroscopic and microscopic
levels.
At the macroscopic level, a variant of
MRI known as diffusion-weighted imaging has been found to be particularly
useful for delineating the white matter
fiber tracts of the brain. The basis of this
imaging approach derives from the fact
that water molecules in living structures,
including those in the brain, are always
moving slightly within their local area.
Such movement, or diffusion, of water
molecules affects the MR signals arising
from the local voxels (i.e., imaging volume units). Because the cellular environments experienced by the different
water molecules differ across the brain,
their diffusion characteristics vary as well.
Modulating certain parameters of the
MR scanning sequence can make the
MR signal from each voxel particularly
sensitive to the amount of local diffusion,
enabling the construction of diffusionweighted images that reflect the diffusion
characteristics across the brain.
A particularly important application
of such diffusion-weighted imaging is
diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), which
quantifies the relative diffusivity of the water molecules in each voxel into directional
components. Because most axonal fibers
in the brain that make up the white matter
fiber tracts are encased in myelin (see the
Appendix), which is particularly hydrophobic, water tends to diffuse more along
fiber tracts than across them, but with
generally less directionality in other types
of brain tissue. Thus, white matter shows
more prominent anisotropy in its diffusion
characteristics (tending to have a preferred direction in its diffusion), whereas
the diffusion in other brain regions tends
to be isotropic (no preferred direction).
A scalar quantity known as the fractional anisotropy (FA) can be computed
for each voxel to express this degree
of anisotropy. Fractional anisotropy can
provide important information about the
composition of the tissue within a voxel.
Notably, some neurological diseases,
such as multiple sclerosis and vascular
dementia, are characterized by white matter pathology that can be identified with

(A)

(B)

Fiber tracking using diffusion tensor imaging (DTI). (A) In this hypothetical five-by-six set of voxels, the diffusivity characteristics of each voxel are represented by an ellipsoid whose dimensions reflect the relative diffusion rates along the different directions, with spheres representing
isotropic diffusion (relatively equal in all directions) and narrow ellipsoids showing stronger
diffusivity values along a particular direction (the longest axis of the ellipsoid). Using tractography approaches, white matter tracts can then be reconstructed from these data by finding
the strongest continuous chain along the preferred diffusion directions across multiple voxels
(shown here in red). (B) This image, derived by DTI tractography, shows some major fiber tracts
in the brain. Shown are the superior longitudinal fasciculus (SLF), the superior fronto-occipital
tract (SFO), the inferior fronto-occipital tract (IFO), the uncinate fasciculus (UNC), and the inferior longitudinal fasciculus (ILF). (B courtesy of Dr. Susumu Mori.)

FA measures. Moreover, individual differences in white matter integrity, such as
with aging, can also be identified with FA.
Thus, these variations can provide additional information for understanding variations in cognitive function, both in normal
individuals and in clinical populations.
Tractography is a powerful application of the DTI technology that allows
delineation of the directionality of fiber
tracts in the brain. More specifically, using DTI, the directional diffusivity in each
voxel can be represented by an ellipsoid
whose relative dimensions reflect the rate
of diffusion in each direction (Figure A).
White matter tracts can then be derived
from these data using algorithms that
estimate continuous tracts of diffusion
across voxels (indicated in red in Figure
A). By following these directions and
continuously connecting the long axes
that fit best along a line, images of the
major nerve fiber tracts can be constructed. These, in turn, allow the formation of maps of structural connectivity in
the brain (Figure B).
DTI can be used in conjunction with
fMRI activation studies in several ways.
(See the text for details about functional
MRI, or fMRI.) First, the fMRI activation
data can help guide the tractography
calculations. Such combination of these
methods can be particularly useful for
delineating the connectivity across com-

plex regions of the brain with multiple,
crossing fiber tracts. Conversely, the DTIdelineated fiber tracts can be used to
help in what are called functional connectivity analyses (see text), which
analyze how certain brain regions vary
together in their activation patterns.
From a microscopic standpoint,
much work is also currently being aimed
toward the goal of reconstructing the
connectivity of the entire human brain
(or the brains of other species) at the
level of neurons and synapses. This nascent (and controversial) effort has been
dubbed connectomics, which refers to
obtaining full knowledge of brain connections (i.e., the connectome, by analogy
with genome).
Obtaining such information at the
cellular level entails computer-assisted
image acquisition and analysis using high-speed methods, along with
organizing the results into an extremely
large database. At the light-microscopic
level, a method called Brainbow has
recently been developed that is based
on molecular genetics techniques used
to delineate individual neurons and their
branches by fluorescence in different
colors (Figure C). At the finer electron microscopic level that allows synapses to
be seen, the challenge of connectomics
is vastly greater, as should be apparent
from the electron micrograph in Figure D.

THE METHODS OF COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE

■ 25

■ BOX 2B (continued)
The proponents of connectomics
argue that a huge database of fine-level
structural connectivity will be a vital resource for all sorts of human and animal
neuroscience research, both basic and
clinical, including studies of cognitive
questions. Given the very large cost and
uncertain outcome, however, opponents have opined that connectomics
would not be a wise investment, except
in studying the brains of small, experimental animals. This interesting debate
seems likely to continue for some time.

(C)

References
Connectomics. (C) An
example of an image from
the light-microscopic
Brainbow technique,
taken from the mouse hippocampus. (D) An electron microscopic section
from the cerebral cortex
indicating the enormous
complexity of brain connectivity at this level. (C, D
courtesy of Jeff Lichtman
and Josh Sanes.)

(D)

mood, attention, memory, and appetite, as well as neurological processes that
can lead to addiction. The nicotine molecule binds to certain acetylcholine
receptors and activates them just as the neurotransmitter acetylcholine itself
does. (Drugs like nicotine that bind to and activate receptors in a manner
similar to a neurotransmitter are called agonists, whereas drugs that bind to
and block receptors are called antagonists.) When coupled with information
derived from neuropharmacological studies in experimental animals and in
vitro systems (i.e., in experimental environments outside the living organism),
pharmacological manipulation can lead to inferences about the contribution
of the relevant neurotransmitter system to the cognitive processes they affect.
A disadvantage of administering drugs systemically (i.e., by injection into the
bloodstream) for studying cognitive processes is the relative lack of specificity
of their effects. With systemic administration, much of the brain (along with
the other organs of the body) is exposed to the drug, and sorting out the effects
on different brain systems can be difficult. A more specific intervention is to
inject substances directly into specific brain areas of an experimental animal.
This approach usually involves surgically implanting a cannula (a very thin
tube) or other drug delivery system that can administer defined amounts of
the experimental agent locally and in a highly controlled manner. For example,
agonists and antagonists of major neurotransmitters such as dopamine and
serotonin have been injected into midbrain regions implicated in reward processing to study the cognitive functions subserved by these key regions. Such
studies have provided insight into the actions of a range of drugs used to treat

HUETTEL, S. A., A. W. SONG AND G.
MCCARTHY (2009) Functional Magnetic
Resonance Imaging, 2nd Ed. Sunderland,
MA: Sinauer.
LICHTMAN, J. W., J. R. LIVET AND J. SANES
(2008) A technicolour approach to the connectome. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 9: 417–422.
MORI, S. AND J. ZHANG (2006) Principles of
diffusion tensor imaging and its application to basic neuroscience research.
Neuron 51: 527–539.
SEUNG, S. (2012) Connectome: How the
Brain’s Wiring Makes Us Who We Are. New
York: Houghton Mifflin/Harcourt Brace.

26 ■ CHAPTER 2
disorders such as depression and schizophrenia and, by implication, insight
into the cognitive functions that go awry in these disorders.

Perturbation by intracranial brain stimulation
A different way of perturbing brain function is direct electrical stimulation
of a specific brain region, a technique used by pioneering neurophysiologists
such as Charles Sherrington and David Ferrier beginning in the late nineteenth
century. In this approach, electrodes are placed onto or into the brain of an experimental animal or a human patient during a neurosurgical procedure (see
Introductory Box). Electrodes can be placed transiently (i.e., just for the duration of the surgery) or chronically for extended studies of the brain’s electrical
activity and responses to electrical stimulation.
In experimental animals, chronically implanted electrodes allow researchers to assess the function of individual neurons or groups of neurons as the
animal (often a monkey) carries out a cognitive task it has been trained to
perform. By altering the strength of the stimulus applied, the effects on the
local neuronal population can be varied to provide additional information.
For example, moderate levels of stimulation can activate neurons and trigger
behavior that suggests what a given population normally does. In contrast,
strong stimulation tends to disrupt normal function, and thus can indicate how
the loss of that neuronal population affects a particular cognitive process. Used
in this latter way, electrical stimulation can effectively create a transient and
reversible “lesion.” Although intracranial stimulation techniques are obviously
invasive, they are sometimes used in humans to enable neurosurgeons to map
the functions of brain regions that they are considering removing or operating
on (see Introductory Box).

Perturbation by extracranial brain stimulation
Although disrupting neural processing by local electrical stimulation can be
informative, the use of this technique in humans is obviously limited to patients with serious medical problems. A far less invasive approach that can be
used to disrupt cognitive processing in normal subjects is transcranial magnetic
stimulation (TMS). In this technique, a strong but transient and rapidly changing
magnetic field is generated over a region of the scalp by passing an intense,
rapidly varying, electrical current through a set of coils (Figure 2.3). The rapidly
changing magnetic field in the coil induces a rapidly changing electrical field
in the underlying brain tissue, resulting in an extraneous flow of current that
transiently interacts with local neural processing. With strong stimulation, this
interaction is typically disruptive, creating a reversible brain “lesion” limited
to the underlying area, in much the same manner that strong direct electrical
stimulation would. With weaker stimulation, this interaction can sometimes
facilitate activation of the underlying area.
Several approaches are used to apply TMS to the study of cognitive processes.
One technique is to apply a series of TMS pulses (e.g., one per second) over
several minutes. The influence of such repetitive TMS (rTMS) stimulation on a
cognitive function of interest can then be examined by behavioral tests that
can be administered during and after the TMS application (up till a couple of
hours afterward). Studies using this approach have shown that, depending on
the strength of stimulation, TMS can either impair or improve performance on
tasks involving the stimulated area, allowing inferences about the role of that
area in performing the task.
Another approach is to deliver a single TMS pulse to a brain area at specific
times during the course of a task trial (the pulse can be delivered just before
a stimulus, for example, or at a particular latency after a stimulus) and then
to study its influence on task performance on that trial. An advantage of this

THE METHODS OF COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE
(A)

(B)

■ 27

(C)

approach is that it provides greater temporal resolution in assessing the role
of the brain area of interest in a cognitive task.
There are, however, several important drawbacks to TMS. First, as indicated
in Figure 2.3, TMS tends to affect a relatively large area, limiting anatomical
resolution. Second, transcranial stimulation can be delivered effectively to only
relatively superficial brain regions, primarily the more superficial regions of
the cerebral cortex (typically up to 1.5 centimeters into the brain). Third, the
technique can result in concurrent stimulation of scalp and head muscles,
especially in attempts to stimulate certain regions of the frontal and temporal
lobes, resulting in uncomfortable and even painful twitching. Finally, although
TMS is in principle noninvasive, the stimulation entails some risk (e.g., strongly
stimulating the brain might trigger a seizure in a person with a physiological
predisposition toward epilepsy). These problems notwithstanding, the ability
to transiently modulate brain function in normal subjects in this way provides
an important additional tool in the quest to understand the neural bases of
cognitive functions.
Another approach for performing extracranial brain stimulation is transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS). The application of such forms of
stimulation actually has a rather long history, having first been developed in
the nineteenth century. It has gone in and out of favor over the years but has
regained popularity of late. In tDCS a constant, low-amplitude, electrical current
is applied directly to the scalp. This is accomplished with a rather simple device
consisting of two electrodes, a battery, and a means of adjusting the strength
of the current. One of the electrodes, typically the smaller one, is placed over
the area of interest to stimulate, and the other electrode is placed elsewhere to
complete the circuit. There are two main types of stimulation: anodal (positive)
stimulation is thought to increase the cortical excitability of the area being
stimulated; cathodal stimulation is thought to decrease the excitability. For scientific purposes, the effects of these stimulation modes are typically compared
to a sham, or control, condition in which no current is delivered.
Like rTMS, tDCS appears to have effects that can last for a period of time
after the stimulation (many minutes). Also like rTMS, tDCS is being used to
study cognitive functions in normal individuals, as well as for treating clinical
problems, including depression and chronic pain. The main disadvantages of
tDCS include the spatial coarseness of the stimulation and the limited understanding of its mechanisms. Because it is inexpensive, simple, and possibly
useful for scientific and clinical purposes, however, interest in this method is
growing in popularity.

Figure 2.3 Transcranial magnetic
stimulation (TMS) (A) In TMS, an
electromagnetic coil is placed on the
surface of the skull, in this example
over the subject’s left frontal lobe.
(B) Rapidly reversing the flow of a very
strong current within the coil induces
a strong transient magnetic field in
the brain. (C) The magnetic field lines
associated with a TMS pulse can be
seen in the upper right of the coronal
MRI phase map. A common yardstick
used to set the appropriate strength
of stimulation for an individual is the
power that needs to be delivered to
the hand area of motor cortex to elicit
a muscle twitch in the hand. (C courtesy of Drs. Daryl Bohning and Mark
George, Medical University of South
Carolina.)

28 ■ CHAPTER 2
(A)
Channelrhodopsin2
(excitatory)

Halorhodopsin
(inhibitory)

Laser light

− −
−−− −− −− −−

+ ++ + ++ + ++ + ++
+ + + +

Laser light

(B)

Injection
Viral expression

Virally
encoded
opsin

A

Laser

A

C
B

Single viral injection into B
(C)

Light delivery

C
B

Opsin expression throughout B

A

C
B

Illumination of B cell bodies
projecting to A and C

Figure 2.4 Optogenetics The optogenetics method uses genetic approaches to transfer light-sensitive ion channels selectively into specific sets of neurons whose activity can
then be modulated with light. (A) Different versions of these genetically transferred ion
channels can be either excitatory (left) or inhibitory (right) for the neuron’s firing.
(B) The basic principle of the method is to insert into a virus the genetic material that
codes for the manufacture of photoreactive ion channels from light-sensitive algae, and
then to inject the virus into a specific brain area. The expression of the inserted genetic
material in the neurons of the injected area leads to the production and incorporation of
these ion channels into neuronal membranes. Shining light on the brain tissue can then
selectively activate (or inactivate) these neurons and modulate their signals to the other
brain areas to which they project, thereby influencing behavior. (C) In the example shown
here, this technique is used to modulate the walking behavior of a mouse. (B after Yihar
et al. 2009.)

Optogenetics
A recently developed technique for selectively stimulating neural circuits far more
specifically is optogenetics. Optogenetics combines genetics with the use of laser
light to activate specific neural circuits or neuronal cell types in a variety of experimental settings, including in a freely moving and behaving animal. Thus, it has
both high neuronal selectivity and high temporal resolution.
As described in the Appendix, the excitability of neuronal membranes is controlled
by ion channels that can be induced to open or close to let ions flow into or out of
the cell. Normally, such ion channels open and close in response to voltage changes
across the cell membrane induced by the binding of neurotransmitters released in
response to signal inputs from other neurons. The basic principle of the optogenetics method involves incorporating ion channels that open or close in response to
light of a certain wavelength into the neurons of interest, thus providing a means

THE METHODS OF COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE

of turning them on and off with light. Moreover, depending on the type of ion
channels incorporated, the neurons can be either excited or inhibited with the
light stimulation (Figure 2.4A).
The means of incorporating these light-sensitive ion channels into the brain
comes from genetics. Typically, genetic material that codes for the manufacture of photoreactive ion channels is extracted from light-sensitive algae and
inserted into a virus. The virus can then be injected into a particular brain area
of interest (Figure 2.4B). The carrier virus infects targeted neurons near the site
of injection, and the inserted genetic material then leads to the production of
these light-sensitive ion channels and their incorporation into the membranes
of the infected neurons. These neurons can then be selectively activated or
inactivated by shining light of the appropriate wavelength on the neural tissue.
The activation of these neurons in turn sends signals within their functional
neural circuits, which can then selectively influence behavior. This approach
has been used to modulate the walking pattern of mice (Figure 2.4C), to alter
the escape response of fruit flies, and even to reduce disordered movements in
mice with motor signs similar to those found in Parkinson’s disease. In sum,
the method of optogenetics appears to have enormous potential for cognitive
neuroscience, as well as possibly for the treatment of certain clinical disorders.

Measuring Neural Activity during Cognitive Processing
The other main approach to understanding the relationship between cognitive
functions and the neural processes that give rise to them is to measure brain
activity while a subject performs specific cognitive tasks. In both humans and
experimental animals, neural activity can be recorded and measured in various
ways, and these methods are a mainstay of cognitive neuroscience.

Direct electrophysiological recording from neurons
In experimental animals, the most commonly used approach for measuring
neural activity is electrophysiological recording, a method that has its roots in
the pioneering neurobiological work of the late nineteenth century. The most
popular modern use of this general technique has been single-neuron electrical recording, which entails measuring the action potentials produced by individual neurons (Figure 2.5; see also the Appendix). Such recordings can record
neuronal firing either extracellularly (from the extracellular space adjacent to
active neurons) or intracellularly (from inside a single neuron).
Extracellular recording is done with fine tungsten or steel electrodes that
are inserted into the extracellular space in the cerebral cortex or deeper brain
structures. The electrode can then monitor the electrical activity associated with
action potentials generated by one or more neurons near the tip. Depending
on the size of the electrode and its placement, the firing from several nearby
neurons can be picked up concurrently, thereby assisting in the gleaning of
information about the behavior of small groups of nerve cells in a region.
For intracellular recording, electrolyte-filled glass electrodes with a much
finer tip are used. To acquire such intracellular data, a single neuron must be
penetrated by the electrode tip, which then records the electrical activity from
within the cell as action potentials and post-synaptic potentials are generated.
Such recordings provide much more detailed information about how single
neurons behave during cognitive or other functions.
Until a few decades ago, extracellular and intracellular recording were carried
out on anesthetized animals, precluding experiments on cognitive functions
that depend on the animals being able to execute behaviors that indicate, for
example, what they may be perceiving or reacting to. More recently, however,
most such electrophysiological experiments have focused on studies in awake,

■ 29

30 ■ CHAPTER 2
(A)

(B)
Recording
electrode

Juice reward
mechanism
Response bar

Stimulus
screen

Visual
stimulus

Fixation
point

Visual
stimulus

Restraint
chair

–400 –200
200 400 600
Stimulus onset
Time (ms)

800

1000

1200

1400

Figure 2.5 Recording single-unit activity in an awake, behaving monkey (A) An
example of the experimental setup and recording apparatus in an experiment where
a monkey has been trained to press a lever for a juice reward. (B) The data recordings in this example are made from a neuron in the visual cortex. As the monkey is
presented with visual stimuli and performs a visual task (here, moving the eyes to
a particular location), the neuron responds with action potentials that are recorded
as ticks on what is known as a raster plot. In such a plot, each row corresponds to
a single trial and displays a tick for each recorded action potential following a single
presentation of the stimulus. These responses are summed vertically across the trials
aligned in time with the stimulus onset (i.e., time-locked), yielding a peristimulus time
histogram of the responses to stimulation (bottom). In this way the activity of neurons
can be related to stimulus processing and the demands of the task being performed.
(B after Colby et al. 1996.)

behaving animals performing specific tasks, typically after extended periods
of training.
Some months prior to such experiments in behaving animals, researchers
typically attach an electrode recording apparatus to the skull over a surgically
exposed brain area of interest (see Figure 2.5A). This apparatus is constructed
in such a way that the electrode can be moved to different positions above the
brain area of interest, and also can be advanced a controlled distance into the
brain tissue. After recovery from the surgery, this device allows the electrode
to be adjusted in position to record from different parts and depths of the brain
region below. By recording and analyzing the activity of different neurons in
a series of experimental sessions in which the animal carries out cognitive
tasks it has been trained to do for a reward, insight into the underlying neural
processes can be obtained.
Although single-unit data can be acquired and analyzed in many ways,
there are two especially useful approaches. In studies of neuronal responses to
stimuli (e.g., a light flash or a sound burst), the neuronal firing pattern across
time in response to the stimulus is acquired in the form of a peristimulus time
histogram (PSTH). As shown in Figure 2.5B, a stimulus is presented a number
of times, each iteration serving as a trial. The neuron’s responsiveness to the

THE METHODS OF COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE

stimulus is determined by temporally aligning the responses following each of
the trials and then summing the number of action potentials across trials into a
histogram time-locked to the stimulus. Such an approach averages out random
background firing when applied over enough trials, giving a much clearer
picture of the average response specifically related to the stimulus processing
with respect to the task being performed. More generally, the approach of
averaging of the brain responses that are time-locked to repeated occurrences
of various events is also used in other brain activity recording methods (to be
described later in the chapter).
Another common way to analyze single-unit electrophysiological data is
by using neuronal tuning curves. In this approach, a stimulus is varied along a
particular dimension (e.g., the orientation of a line while recording from neurons in visual cortex, or the frequency of a tone while recording from auditory
cortex), and the strength of the response is plotted (usually in terms of spikes
per second) as a function of the stimulus parameter being varied. The resulting
curve defines the selective sensitivity of the cell to some values of that stimulus
parameter relative to others.
In most neural electrophysiological recording, single electrodes are used
and only one brain region is investigated in each animal. Recently, however,
researchers have started to employ multielectrode recording arrays to evaluate the
concurrent responsiveness of sets of neurons in a given area of the brain or in
related brain regions. For example, a single electrode might have multiple recording points along its length or protruding from its end, enabling the investigator
to record simultaneously from multiple neurons distributed across the brain
region of interest, such as across different cortical layers. Some researchers
set up two or more such recording rigs, enabling them to measure neuronal
activity simultaneously from widely separated but potentially functionally
related regions of the brain. Simultaneously recorded data gathered using
these approaches can then be analyzed with correlational computer algorithms
to assess how neuronal activity in different parts of a putative neural circuit
interacts in subserving a particular cognitive function.
Many cognitive functions can be studied with these electrophysiological
methods. Some of the more basic functions, such as those underlying the sensory
processing described in Chapters 3 and 4, are generally amenable to study in
nonprimate experimental animals such as rodents. But studies of more complex
functions (such as attention, decision making, and symbolic representation) are
more typically undertaken in monkeys. Monkeys are expensive to obtain and
maintain, however, and, as already mentioned, their use in such experiments
can raise ethical questions. Moreover, it can take weeks or even months to train
a monkey to do tasks that a human could master in only minutes.
Of course, some cognitive functions—such as those involving language or
abstract reasoning—can be studied only in humans. Accordingly, over the years
there has been great interest in taking advantage of circumstances in which
intracranial electrophysiological recording can be performed in humans (e.g.,
during the presurgical cortical mapping procedures that are medically necessary in patients with epilepsy or other neurological disorders; see Introductory
Box). Although the restrictions are obviously great, recordings of brain activity
taken under such circumstances have provided important information about
a variety of cognitive functions. Nonetheless, studying cognitive functions in
humans has increasingly depended on the noninvasive electrical recording
methods and brain imaging techniques described in the following sections.

Electroencephalography (EEG)
Ever since the German psychiatrist Hans Berger discovered “brain waves” in
the 1920s, a preeminent way of studying human brain activity associated with

■ 31

32 ■ CHAPTER 2
(A)

(B)
Electroencephalographic
leads
Voltage ( μV)

Central
sulcus

Cz
Pz
Fz

0
C3

F3

FPz
F7
T3

T5

P3
O1

0

2
Time (s)

3

4

6
8
10
Frequency (Hz)

12

4

Oz

Inion
Left mastoid

2

Figure 2.6 Electroencephalographic
recording (EEG) (A) In electroencephalography, electrical potentials are
recorded at different positions over
the scalp relative to the voltage at a
reference electrode. By historical convention, scalp locations are typically
described with respect to a standardized nomenclature known as the International 10-20 or 10-10 system, in
which letters indicate the position on
the scalp with respect to underlying
cortical regions (F, frontal; C, central;
P, parietal; O, occipital; T, temporal)
and the suffix numbers indicate a general position with respect to the midline (odd numbers are on the left, even
numbers on the right); the suffix z
indicates placement along the midline.
The electrical potential recording from
each electrode is somewhat different
because each one samples primarily
the electrical activity of large populations of neurons in the subjacent brain
regions relative to a reference electrode site (here, on the left mastoid,
behind the left ear). (B) Ongoing EEG
activity in a normal subject with the
eyes closed—a circumstance that
elicits predominant activity near 10
hertz (in the alpha frequency band), as
indicated in the graph at the bottom of
the panel. μV = microvolts.

1

Power ( μV2)

Sylvian
fissure

EEG
30

14

16

cognitive processes has been by means of electroencephalographic (EEG) recording. EEG recordings measure electrical brain waves that can be detected
at the scalp. Compared to the methods described in the previous section, EEG
recording is fully noninvasive, although it has other limitations. The method
makes use of a set of surface electrodes, ranging in number from only a few to
as many as 256, which typically are embedded in an elastic cap fitted over the
scalp (Figure 2.6A; see also Figure 2.8). The electrodes are brought into good
electrical contact with the skin by means of a conducting gel or salt paste and
the pressure from the elasticity of the cap. The voltages at each electrode, along
with that of a reference electrode placed elsewhere on the head (often the mastoid
bone behind the ear), are fed into differential amplifiers. The amplifiers enhance
the voltage differences between each electrode and the reference electrode, and
the amplified signals are then digitized and recorded for subsequent analysis.
The frequency of the EEG voltage fluctuations range from a fraction of 1 hertz
to 100 hertz or more (Figure 2.6B).
Rather than reflecting the action potential firing typically measured in the
single-neuron recordings described in the previous section, the EEG signal
derives from the summed dendritic field potentials of groups of neurons that are
varying together, as illustrated in Figure 2.7. The dendritic trees of the larger
cortical neurons are generally oriented perpendicularly to the cortical surface.
When, for example, there is excitatory synaptic input to the dendrites near the
cell body, the voltage across the membrane of the underlying neuronal dendritic
trees is depolarized by the synaptic activity (i.e., relative to its normal baseline
value of approximately 70 millivolts, it becomes less negative or even reaches a
positive voltage; see the Appendix). The resulting separation of charge created
along the length of the dendrites causes intracellular current flow along the
inside of the dendrite, as well as conduction of the return current through the
tissue volume outside the dendrite. The scalp electrodes pick up the fluctuating voltages associated with these dynamically changing return currents. This
interpretation of the basis of EEG is well supported by other data, such as direct
intracranial recordings in experimental animals.

THE METHODS OF COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE

−

+

EEG
electrode
Scalp

Figure 2.7 Electrophysiological basis of EEG and ERP
signals Fluctuating voltages are generated when synaptic
input to a cortical area results in a voltage gradient along
the dendritic trees of large pyramidal neurons that are oriented more or less perpendicularly to the cortical surface.
The electrode on the subject’s scalp picks up the associated voltages from currents that are volume-conducted
through the skull and scalp tissues outside the neuronal
dendrites.

Skull

Active
synapses

+

+

Dura mater
Arachnoid
Subarachnoid
space
Pia mater

−

+

+

−

−

−
−

−

+

■ 33

−

Afferent
axons
Efferent
axons

Indeed, although most intracranial recording of electrophysiological activity
in animals focuses on measuring and analyzing the neuronal spikes associated
with action potentials, as described in the previous section, the nonspike electrical fluctuations that occur in and around the dendritic trees of the large cortical
pyramidal cells can also provide important insight into neural processing. More
and more animal researchers recording intracranially are now also studying
these slower-frequency dendritic field fluctuations, which are generally called
local field potentials (LFPs) when measured intracranially, and the role they play
in cognitive functions. As already described, these field potential fluctuations
reflect variations in the polarization of the dendrites due to modulation by
axonal input coming from other brain regions. Thus, they reflect more of the
integrative processing of these large cortical neurons, rather than the output
firing of the cell to other regions that is reflected in spike recordings. Note that
the volume conduction of these local field potential fluctuations is what gives
rise to the EEG activity that can be recorded noninvasively from the scalp.
Ongoing EEG signals measured over time are widely used in clinical settings to assess various aspects of brain function. These signals are typically
analyzed in terms of the power in various frequency bands at each electrode
location, the major bands of interest being delta (< 4 Hz), theta (4–8 Hz), alpha
(8–12 Hz), beta (12–25 Hz), gamma (25–70 Hz), and, more recently, high gamma
(70–150 Hz) The relative power in these bands, along with other aspects of the
EEG, is very useful for assessing the overall state of the brain, such as arousal
level and sleep stages (see Chapter 7), as well as for detecting and monitoring
the abnormal activity associated with epilepsy.

34 ■ CHAPTER 2
1s

EEG
Amplifier
S1

S3 sääsääsääsääsääsääsä Sn

S2

S1

Stimulus

S2
sä
sä
sä
Sn

Signal
averager

1
n

n

∑S

k

k =1

Visual event-related potential (ERP)
–2

N1
NP80
N2

Voltage (μV)

Figure 2.8 Event-related potentials (ERPs) An ERP is revealed by
extracting portions, or epochs, of the
ongoing EEG time-locked to repeated
occurrences of a sensory, cognitive,
or motor event and averaging the epochs together. In this way, the background EEG signal that is unrelated to
the event is averaged out, revealing
the average event-related response to
the stimulus. In the example shown,
the ERP is recorded from the occipital
scalp in response to a repeated visual
stimulus (S). For historical reasons,
ERP traces have typically been plotted
with scalp negativity upward (“negative up”); more recently, however, a
number of researchers have been
following the opposite scheme (“negative down”). Thus, it is important to
always examine such plots for the
indication of polarity. μV = microvolts.

P2
+2
P1
–100

0

100
200
Time (ms)

300

Event-related potentials (ERPs)
Although the ongoing EEG signal is useful for assessing the overall state of
the brain, its utility in investigating specific cognitive functions is relatively
limited. The reason is that the ongoing EEG record is not linked in time to any
particular cognitive process or event. A more effective way of relating scalp
electrical activity to cognitive function is to implement a time-locked averaging approach, analogous in some ways to the peristimulus histogram process
described earlier for single-neuron recordings. The most common signals to
extract from the ongoing EEG in this way are event-related potentials (ERPs).
ERPs are small voltage fluctuations in an ongoing EEG triggered by sensory
and cognitive events; they reflect the summed electrical activity of neuronal
populations specifically responding to those events (Figure 2.8). As such, they
can provide high temporal resolution (milliseconds) of the neural processing
underlying various cognitive functions. However, because ERPs are generally
smaller than the raw EEG signal in which they are embedded, it is necessary
to average multiple trials to extract ERP signals from the background noise.
As shown in Figure 2.8, ERPs are extracted by averaging those epochs of the
EEG signal that are time-locked to repeated occurrences of a specific sensory,
motor, or cognitive event. The ongoing EEG varies more or less randomly in
amplitude relative to the timing of these events; these random fluctuations in
the EEG tend to average out, leaving only those voltage changes specifically
associated with processing of the event type of interest. An ERP obtained by
such an averaging process is thus a measure of average evoked voltage changes
over time, where time zero is the time of occurrence of the event.
The average ERP trace obtained in this way generally comprises a series
of negative and positive peaks that are typically named according to their

THE METHODS OF COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE

electrical polarity (N or P for negative or positive, respectively) and their latency;
thus, for example, the N100 specifies a negative peak 100 milliseconds after
the stimulus onset. Alternatively, the peaks can be named for their order in the
sequence (thus, the N100 might also be referred to as the N1, because it is the
first major negative peak).
ERPs are usually recorded while subjects are presented with various types
of stimuli and are engaged in cognitive tasks related to those stimuli. Changes
in the ERP responses as a function of stimulus type and task conditions are
then used to infer something about the mechanisms underlying the cognitive
process in question. Because the signals derive from the electrical aspects of
neuronal activity, ERPs reflect that neuronal activity with very high temporal
resolution, and they are thus especially useful for studies in which the timing
and sequence of functional brain activity are particularly important. For example,
ERPs can indicate how early attention can exert an influence on the processing
of sensory input (see Chapter 6), or the time point in language processing at
which the semantic analysis of a word begins (see Chapter 12).
Although the major advantage of ERPs in studying cognitive processes
is high temporal resolution, information can also be gained from the spatial
distribution of the scalp recordings as a way to gain some understanding of the
likely sources of the activity (Figure 2.9). For example, focal activation over the
occipital scalp is likely to be coming from occipital cortex, and thus to entail visual
processing (see Chapters 4 and 6). Coupled with their high temporal resolution,
ERP recordings can thus provide a dynamic picture of brain activity over time.
If many electrodes are used (usually at least 64), analysis algorithms can be
used to estimate the locations of the neural generators producing scalp-recorded
ERPs. For simple distributions, such as ERP waves that reflect relatively early
sensory processing activity (or the cognitive effects on such activity), this approach can work reasonably well. There is, however, a fundamental problem

■ 35

Figure 2.9 Topographical maps
showing spatial-temporal patterns of
ERP activity The electrode locations
where the ERP data were recorded
are shown by the black dots; different
colors correspond to different levels of voltage across the head, after
interpolating the levels between the
electrodes. The result is a topographical voltage map analogous to a geographic contour map. This example
shows the response across time to a
visual stimulus in the left visual field, a
stimulus that activates the right occipital cortex. μV = microvolts.

0–25
ms

25–50
ms

50–75
ms

75–100
ms

100–125
ms

125–150
ms

150–175
ms

175–200
ms

200–225
ms

225–250
ms
4.0

0.0

250–275
ms

275–300
ms

300–325
ms

300–325
ms

325–350
ms

–4.0
Potential
μV

36 ■ CHAPTER 2
with such analyses, which is known as the inverse problem: in general, a given
distribution of electrical activity recorded at the scalp could have been produced
by any one of a number of different sets of generators inside the head. Accordingly, such analyses, especially for more complex activity distributions and/or
for studies without additional source-related information, must be viewed with
caution and are an important limitation of the ERP approach. These limitations
can to some degree be circumvented by combining ERP methods with other
techniques or approaches, as described later in the chapter.
Although most cognitive neuroscience research using electroencephalographic techniques has made use of ERP analyses using time-locked averaging,
in recent years there has been increasing interest in event-related averaging
approaches applied to oscillatory activity in the EEG signal. This approach
differs in several ways from earlier EEG analyses that focused on changes
over a relatively extended period of time in the power of different frequency
bands as a function of arousal, sleep stage, or other cognitive states. The newer
approach extracts the average changes in amplitude (i.e., power) or phase coherence (i.e., how synchronized the waves are over different cortical regions) in
specific frequency bands following (or possibly preceding) a specific type of
cognitive event. These time-locked changes in oscillatory activity have been
reported to be associated with a range of cognitive functions, including binding of perceptual features, attentional modulation, and cognitive control, and
they are thought to provide an additional window into the neural processes
underlying cognitive functions.

Magnetoencephalography (MEG)
Another way to measure electrophysiological brain activity noninvasively is
to record the magnetic counterpart of EEG—namely, to use magnetoencephalography, or MEG. Much as ERPs can be extracted from EEG recordings by
time-locked averaging to a set of stimulus events, this method can be used to
extract time-locked responses, called event-related magnetic-field responses
(ERFs), from ongoing MEG signals. The generation of MEG/ERF signals is
closely related to that of EEG/ERP signals because both arise from current
flow triggered by depolarization in the dendritic trees of cortical neurons oriented perpendicularly to the cortical surface. The key difference is that MEG
measures the magnetic fields produced by these currents rather than the associated voltage fluctuations.
The principles of MEG are illustrated in Figure 2.10. When current flows in
a wire or other conducting element, it produces a magnetic field in the volume
surrounding the wire (Figure 2.10A). The configuration of the field follows
the “right-hand rule” taught in introductory physics: if the right hand is made
into a fist with the thumb pointing out and oriented in the direction of the current, then the field curves around the current in the orientation of the fingers.
When synaptic activation causes currents to flow along the dendritic trees of a
population of cortical neurons, a magnetic field is induced whose orientation
is governed by the right-hand rule. This induced magnetic field “comes out of
the head” on one side of the current source and “enters the head” on the other
(Figure 2.10B). If the field strengths are measured at different points on the
surface of the head with a magnetometer (Figure 2.10C), the distribution of
these values over space and time can be obtained, including whether they are
positive (coming out of the head) or negative (going into the head).
Although initially MEG recordings were made from only a few sites at a
time, modern machines record fields from sites over the entire head. Knowing
the measured field distribution makes it possible to estimate the location and
orientation of the underlying source, but the same general limitations imposed

THE METHODS OF COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE
(C)

(B)

(A)
Magnetic field

To electronics

Magnetic field

Magnetometer
probe

Skull
Current

Cortex
Active
neurons

Figure 2.10 Magnetoencephalographic signals (MEG) (A) An electrical current in a wire creates a circular
magnetic field. (B) Dendritic currents in
cortex also produce circular magnetic
fields, analogous to those produced
by the current in a wire. Note that the
fields most easily measured are generated in the sulci, because those fields
enter and exit the scalp orthogonally,
allowing them to be detected well by
a magnetometer outside the head.
Fields generated by neural activity in
the gyri generally produce magnetic
fields oriented parallel to the scalp,
which are more difficult to detect. (C)
The magnetic fields produced by brain
activity can be measured by a magnemometer positioned adjacent to the
head. (D) Distribution of the magnetic
fields (the M100 wave at 100 ms) over
the head of a normal subject induced
by an auditory stimulus; the MR image
on the right shows the estimated location of the underlying source derived
by dipole source analysis. fT = femtoteslas. (D after Woldorff et al. 1999.)

■ 37

Current
dipole

Pickup coils
One of the
magnetic
flux lines
Magnetic field
distribution
at the scalp

(D) MEG response to left-ear sounds

M100
single subject

Estimated MEG
M100 source

115–125
ms

Field lines

40.00
34.29
28.57
22.86
17.14
11.43
5.71
0.00
–5.71
–11.43
–17.14
–22.86
–28.57
–34.29
–40.00

by the inverse problem for EEG recordings (described earlier) apply to MEG
as well.
Although the MEG/ERF and EEG/ERP methodologies are related, they have
practical as well as physical differences. One important difference concerns the
brain areas that the two techniques can most successfully assess. MEG is sensitive mainly to neuronal activity in the cortical valleys, or sulci; it is relatively
insensitive to activity in gyri (see Figure 2.10B). This sensitivity to sulcal activity
is due to the orientation of the electrical currents that generate the magnetic
fields. As noted earlier, these currents generally arise from the dendritic trees
of the large cortical pyramidal neurons oriented perpendicularly to the cortical surface (see Figure 2.7). If the underlying electrical currents flowing along
these dendritic trees are in a sulcus, they produce fields that either enter or exit
the head more or less orthogonally, as shown in Figure 2.10C, and are picked
up well by the magnetometer. However, neuronal activity in a cortical gyrus
produces currents that are mostly perpendicular to the surface of the head,
inducing magnetic fields that are mostly parallel to the head surface and thus

fT

38 ■ CHAPTER 2
do not register well on the magnetometer. In contrast, the electrodes that pick up
EEG and ERP signals detect voltage fluctuations produced by the return-volume
currents, which are not affected by this limitation. Accordingly, EEG picks up
voltage fluctuations from sources in both cortical gyri and sulci, although it
tends to be more sensitive to the former.
Although MEG’s insensitivity to gyral sources renders it less complete than
EEG methods, what MEG does pick up (i.e., mainly sulcal activity) is easier to
localize—for two main reasons: First, EEG currents suffer some distortion as
they are conducted through the variable resistances of the skull and other tissues to reach the recording electrodes on the scalp. The magnetic fields in MEG
recordings are much less affected by this problem. In addition, because MEG
picks up mainly sulcal sources (and best from those nearer the magnetometer),
the signal distributions it records tend to be less complex than those from ERP
signals, thereby simplifying source estimation. Given their complementary
sensitivities, recording by MEG and EEG methods together can offer a more
complete and effective way to estimate sources and study mechanisms than
does either method alone.

Positron emission tomography (PET) imaging
Probably the most popular techniques today for assessing brain activity related
to cognitive functions are those that rely on measuring changes in metabolism
and blood flow to visualize active areas of the brain. The attractiveness of these
functional brain imaging methods arises from several factors, but derives
mainly from their ability to produce images that localize brain activity with
high spatial resolution.
The brain utilizes a remarkably large fraction (20 percent) of the body’s
energy resources, despite representing only about 2 percent of body mass,
and at any given moment the most active nerve cells use more of these and
other metabolites than do relatively quiescent neurons. To meet the increased
metabolic demands of active neurons, the local flow of blood to the relevant
brain area increases. Detecting and mapping these local changes in cerebral
metabolism and blood flow is the hemodynamic basis of two functional imaging
techniques that have been widely used: positron emission tomography (PET)
and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Because these techniques
reveal patterns of activity in the whole intact brain with good spatial resolution,
they have greatly advanced our ability to study cognitive functions and their
neural underpinnings.
In positron emission tomography, or PET, unstable positron-emitting isotopes
are synthesized in a cyclotron by bombarding elements such as oxygen, carbon,
or fluorine with protons. Because of its short half-life, the isotope most commonly
used for PET functional mapping has been 15O (oxygen-15, with a half-life of 2
minutes), which is incorporated into water molecules for this activity-mapping
use. When the radiolabeled compounds are injected into the bloodstream, they
become distributed in the brain according to current physiological needs, accumulating preferentially in more metabolically active areas.
As the unstable isotope decays, the extra proton breaks down into a neutron
and an emitted positron. The emitted positron travels several millimeters, on
average, until it collides with an electron. The collision of a positron with an
electron destroys both particles, emitting two gamma rays that travel in opposite
directions from the site of the collision. Gamma-ray detectors placed around
the subject’s head are arranged to register a “hit” only when two detectors 180
degrees apart react simultaneously (Figure 2.11A,B). By reconstructing the
density of these collision lines using computer algorithms, the location of the
active regions can be imaged. The PET images of activity can then be superimposed onto magnetic resonance structural images from the same subject(s)

THE METHODS OF COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE
(A)

(B)
Oxygen-15
nucleus

Detectors

■ 39

(C)

Gamma
ray
Positron

Electron

Gamma
ray

Positronelectron
collision
Gamma
rays created

to provide spatial information about specific brain areas involved in cognitive
and other functions (Figure 2.11C).
The mean distance that the positrons travel in brain tissue before the
gamma-producing collision with an electron limits the theoretical resolution
of PET scanning to several millimeters, although true resolution is typically considerably lower because of spatial smoothing and other steps in the
analysis. An even greater limitation of PET, however, is the time required to
accumulate an adequate signal, which precludes its use in many cognitive
paradigms. In particular, PET activation imaging requires accumulating signal over the period of about a minute or so (i.e., the signal to obtain a usable
image must be compiled over this time frame), and thus it has essentially no
temporal resolution. As a result, functional imaging experiments using PET
require a blocked design. In this design, the brain activity measured reflects
neural activity integrated over an extended period (a block) while the subject
performs a task or is presented with a particular stimulus condition. The
resulting activation pattern can then be compared to the activity recorded
during a different block of time in which the subject is not doing the task or is
under a different condition. The need to integrate activity across time in this
way thus substantially limits the specificity with which brain activation can
be associated with particular cognitive processes.
The various limitations of PET (the short half-life of the reagents, the need
for a nearby cyclotron to create the reagents, the use of radioactivity, and the
very poor temporal resolution) have led to its replacement in most cognitive
studies today by functional magnetic resonance imaging.

Functional magnetic resonance imaging (functional MRI or fMRI)
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI; Figure 2.12A) is based on the fact
that oxyhemoglobin (hemoglobin carrying a bound oxygen molecule) and deoxyhemoglobin (the oxygen-depleted form of hemoglobin) have different magnetic resonance signals. As noted already, active brain areas use more oxygen
than relatively inactive areas, and thus require more local blood flow. Within
a second or two after an area has been activated by a specific cognitive event
or task, the related microvasculature responds to the resulting local oxygen
depletion by increasing the flow of new, oxyhemoglobin-rich, arterial blood to
the active area (Figure 2.12B). The relative concentration of deoxyhemoglobin
decreases over the next few seconds, leading to localized changes in the magnetic resonance (MR) signal from that part of the brain (Figure 2.12C). These

Figure 2.11 Positron emission
tomography (PET) (A) In PET, molecules labeled with radioactive probe
atoms such as 15O are injected into
the bloodstream. These agents travel
preferentially to areas of increased
neural activity because of increased
metabolism and thus blood flow
to those areas. Radioactive decay
ultimately emits two “annihilation
photons” (gamma rays) in opposite directions. (B) The annihilation
photons are detected by sensors
surrounding the head of the subject
lying in the PET scanner. (C) A PET
activation image overlaid on a structural magnetic resonance image. (C
courtesy of David Madden.)

40 ■ CHAPTER 2
(A)

Figure 2.12 Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) (A) A subject is
moved into an MRI scanner for functioal MR imaging. The machine itself is not
different from the scanner shown and described in Box 2A. The subject is wearing
goggles in order to view visual stimuli for the experiment to be undertaken.
(B) The blood oxygenation level–dependent (BOLD) signal. The vascular system
supplies blood containing oxyhemoglobin to active regions of the brain. The influx
of oxygenated blood to regions that become active reduces the local concentration of deoxyhemoglobin, which increases the BOLD signal; the difference in the
signal provides a measure of local neuronal activity. (C) There are several ways
to display functional MRI data on corresponding structural MRI scans, including
overlaying onto an image slice; overlaying onto a three-dimensional image of the
cortical surface extracted computationally from the MR structural image data; or
overlaying onto the three-dimensional image of an extracted cortical surface that
has been “inflated” by a computer algorithm. (B after Huettel et al. 2009.)
(C)

(B)

fMRI on MR slice
Baseline

fMRI on folded brain

Oxyhemoglobin
Deoxyhemoglobin

Active

Oxyhemoglobin
fMRI on “inﬂated” brain
Deoxyhemoglobin

MR changes, known as the blood oxygenation level–dependent (BOLD) signal,
are the basis of most current forms of fMRI.
Functional MRI offers better spatial localization than PET (several millimeters
compared to approximately a centimeter in PET), as well as much better temporal
resolution (a few seconds compared to a minute or more in PET). In addition,
fMRI uses endogenous signals intrinsic to normal brain function rather than
signals originating from exogenous, radioactively labeled probes. But probably
the greatest advantage of fMRI over PET for the study of cognitive processes is
its much higher temporal resolution.

■ 41

THE METHODS OF COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE

PET signal
Design AAAAAAAAAAAA

Rest

1 min

BBBBBBBBBBBB

1 min

1 min

10 min

10 min

MR signal

(B)

Design AAAAAA Rest
30 s

BBBBBB AAAAAA BBBBBB

30 s

30 s

30 s

30 s

5

10

15

20

Rest

BBBBBB

30 s

30 s

(C)

MR signal

Most initial fMRI studies in the early 1990s followed
the same blocked design as PET studies (Figure 2.13A),
although the blocks were only around 20 to 30 seconds,
as compared to a minute, and there was no need for
a long waiting period between blocks (Figure 2.13B).
However, investigators soon realized that fMRI had
enough temporal resolution to allow an event-related
design. Today, samples of fMRI activity throughout
the whole brain can be acquired in a second or two,
allowing the average fMRI hemodynamic response
to a single stimulus or cognitive event type to be captured. The fMRI response to a stimulus or cognitive
event begins at about 1 to 2 seconds, peaks at about
5 to 6 seconds, and returns to baseline at about 12 to
15 seconds (Figure 2.13C). Although this sequence
is very slow relative to the millisecond resolution of
electrophysiological methods such as EEG, MEG, or
single-unit recording, it is fast enough to allow fMRI
to be applied in an event-related manner, at least when
stimuli are presented at a moderately slow rate. As
shown in Figure 2.13D, this capability allows selective
averaging of the responses to different event types
within a run, much as is done with electrophysiological methods. Moreover, using temporal randomization of the stimulus or task events and modern signal
processing algorithms that effectively disentangle
the overlapping responses from successive stimuli, it
is now possible to present stimuli at faster rates and
still extract an event-related response (Figure 2.14).
The development of event-related methods for fMRI
was a highly significant advance, as it enabled many
cognitive paradigms that had not been possible in the
early days of fMRI. Moreover, improved analytic techniques in event-related paradigms made it possible to
link the behavioral measures from trial to trial to the

(A)

0

Time (s)

Stimulus A

(D)
MR signal

Figure 2.13 Experimental designs in PET and fMRI
studies (A) In PET functional imaging studies, which necessarily employ a block design, the subject performs a
cognitive task continuously over approximately 1 minute,
with different tasks being performed in each block (in this
example either task A or B, or, in the resting block, neither). If 15O-labeled water is used as the tracer, a 10-minute break between blocks is necessary to allow the radioactively labeled tracers to decay sufficiently before the
next block. Accumulated activity for each block is then
measured, and functional activity is inferred by comparing the different blocks. (B) The block design for fMRI is
similar, but with multiple samples of brain activity in each
block, much shorter blocks, and no need for a 10-minute
break between blocks. (C) Because of the much faster
activity sampling possible with fMRI (typically every 1.5
to 2 seconds), the fMRI responses to individual events
can be captured in an event-related way. Shown is a
representative fMRI response to a single event type
(event type A). (D) This paradigm allows the time-locked
responses to different event types within the same run to
be selectively extracted (i.e., event types A and B).

Design

A

A

A

B

A

B

B

A

Selective
averaging

A

B

B

A

B

42 ■ CHAPTER 2
0.3

p < 10 –17

Right hemifield
response
Signal change (%)

p < 10 –7

L

0.2

0.1

0.0

R
–0.1
0.3
Left hemifield
response
Signal change (%)

Figure 2.14 Event-related fMRI
responses Responses are from a
visual stimulation paradigm obtained
at fast stimulus rates (two events
per second). Unilateral visual stimuli
were presented in random order to
the left and right visual fields while
subjects fixated on a central cross.
At this high stimulation rate, there is
severe overlap of the fMRI responses
to successive stimuli in the sequence. The overlap was eliminated
in this example by a subtraction
technique, yielding clean average
hemodynamic fMRI responses (right
panels) in the visual sensory areas
in contralateral occipital cortex (left
panels). (After Burock et al. 1998.)

L

R

0.2

0.1

0.0

–0.1
–4

–2

0

2

4

6
8
Time (s)

10

12

14

16

corresponding fMRI neural responses in different brain regions. In particular,
variations in a behavioral measure (e.g., the reaction time) could be examined
with respect to how they co-varied with the amplitudes of the corresponding
fMRI responses from trial to trial. The development of event-related paradigms
using fMRI has also allowed researchers to compare the response images with
the activation patterns of high-temporal-resolution ERP and ERF responses to
the same types of events. In addition, modern fMRI techniques allow the use of
“hybrid,” or “mixed,” designs that have both block- and event-related experimental
manipulations, the effects of which can be disentangled by appropriate analyses.
As a result of its many advantages, fMRI has emerged today as the dominant
technology for imaging brain activation in studies of both normal and abnormal
cognitive function.

Using fMRI to analyze activation patterns within a brain area
The bulk of fMRI research has focused on activations of various brain areas
as a function of a specific manipulated variable, such as the presentation of
stimuli of a particular type, under particular cognitive conditions. Yet, as later
chapters make plain, the cortex possesses considerable local organization within
particular areas, and these organizational characteristics are often functionally
important. Although such local characteristics may be reflected in intervoxel
differences in fMRI, standard fMRI analysis does not typically take them into
consideration. Indeed, researchers usually apply spatial smoothing to their
fMRI data to increase sensitivity, and they require activations to be of a specified minimum number of voxels to be meaningful. Both of these strategies tend
to obscure differences between nearby voxels.
A number of approaches aimed at addressing this problem are based on
what are known as pattern classification algorithms. In particular, within fMRI,
researchers use an analysis scheme called multivoxel pattern analysis (MVPA) for
such purposes, which looks at patterns of activation across voxels that consis-

THE METHODS OF COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE

■ 43

tently correspond to a particular stimulus type or event type, rather than the
overall increase or decrease in activation of a large brain region. For example,
in an area of the lateral occipital cortex that is generally responsive to objects,
images of cars may activate the area about as much as houses and tools do, at
Figure 2.15 Repetition suppression
in fMRI studies (A) A conventional
least collapsed across all the voxels of the “object analysis” area. But one type
fMRI experiment may fail to distinof visual object may induce a particular pattern of activation among those
guish between responses to stimulus
voxels that is consistently different from the pattern that objects of a different
A and stimulus B because the two
class would induce. MVPA specifically analyzes whether such trial-related
stimuli activate different populations
activation patterns are indeed consistently observed. In addition, these sorts
of neurons (orange versus blue in the
figure) within the same brain region
of analyses can be used to predict the patterns of activation for new examples
sampled; hence the total fMRI signal
of the different stimulus types. Such approaches have thereby enabled, for
may be similar. (B) Using a form of
example, inferring from brain activation data the particular type of stimulus a
repetition suppression (fMRI adaptaparticipant is likely looking at. Thus, these sorts of pattern analysis approaches
tion), it may be possible to detect a
are becoming increasingly popular in cognitive neuroscience fMRI research.
difference in fMRI signal within this
brain region. When the subpopulaRepetition suppression is another way researchers have endeavored to astion of neurons sensitive to stimulus
sess functional characteristics of a brain area that respond similarly to differA adapts, the signal is reduced for a
ent stimulus classes in overall activation magnitude
repetition of stimulus A but strong for
(Figure 2.15). This technique rests on the tendency
stimulus B. (After Kourtzi and Grillof areas of the brain to respond less to the repeated
Spector 2005.)
occurrence of an identical (or closely similar) stimu(A) Standard fMRI experiment
lus than to the first presentation of the stimulus. In
fMRI, the version of this approach most commonly
used is known as fMRI adaptation. The use of fMRI
Similar
fMRI
fMRI
adaptation to enhance the understanding of a brain
signal
signal
region is based on the assumption that if that region
shows repetition suppression for the second stimulus
in a pair (e.g., the target in a particular prime-target
combination), then the two stimuli must share a proNeural
cess supported in some way by that region. Thus, by
circuits
manipulating the relationship between primes and
targets, it is possible to constrain hypotheses regarding
Blank
Stimulus A
Blank
Stimulus B
the function of a particular brain region. For example,
the lateral occipital region mentioned in the previous
example as being activated during the processing
Stimuli
of visual objects showed repetition suppression for
repeated objects (e.g., an image of a table) even when
the two stimuli were presented in different formats
(e.g., as a drawing versus as a photo) or with different
(B) fMRI adaptation experiment
angular views. This finding suggests that the lateral
occipital complex is concerned with processing an
object’s abstract properties rather than the details of
fMRI
Greater
signal
its sensory features.
fMRI
In some instances, fMRI adaptation can provide
signal
additional information about the processing role of a
brain region that standard fMRI methods cannot. For
example, in conventional fMRI, comparing two stimuNeural
circuits
lus conditions A and B may fail to reveal differences
between them because the populations of neurons
sensitive to these conditions (or two stimulus types)
Stimulus A
are mixed within the same brain region being sampled
repeated
Blank
Stimulus A
Stimulus B
(see Figure 2.15A). In contrast, in the fMRI adaptation
paradigm, the subpopulations of neurons sensitive to
stimulus A may show adaptation when this stimulus
Stimuli
is repeated, giving rise to a lower fMRI signal than
that elicited for stimulus B (see Figure 2.15B).

44 ■ CHAPTER 2

Using fMRI to examine activity relationships between brain areas
Most neuroimaging studies in cognitive neuroscience build on the concept of
localization of function—namely, that different brain regions support different
types of information processing. However, brain regions do not participate in
cognitive brain function in isolation. Information flows between regions via the
action potential signals transmitted by axons, which are bundled together into
large fiber tracts. Although an enormous amount of knowledge has been gained
about such anatomical connections, knowledge of the structural connections
between brain regions can provide only a limited picture of information flow
in the brain. Understanding of the functional connectivity, or how the activity of
one brain region varies with the activity in another brain region, is also needed.
Functional MRI can help elucidate the functional relationships between brain
regions because of its ability to acquire functional activation data both from
across the whole brain and from across time. The simplest type of relationship
between regions is coactivation, in which two or more brain regions change
similarly in response to an experimental condition. A straightforward and
rather complementary way to show that two (or more) regions share functional
connectivity comes from studies of resting-state connectivity, which identify
fMRI signal fluctuations that co-vary across brain regions while subjects lie in
the MRI scanner but do not perform an experimental task. These co-variations
are thought to reflect spontaneously occurring operations of the brain rather
than the processing of specific external stimuli.
One way to extract the distributed patterns of common activation that occur
during rest is to use data exploration techniques such as principal component
analysis (PCA) or independent component analysis (ICA), which use algorithms for
extracting similarly behaving portions of a complex data set. Alternatively, one
can choose a seed voxel or group of voxels in a specific region of interest and
determine which other regions exhibit similar fluctuations in activation over
time. Using these approaches, researchers have found co-varying activation in
groups of regions that have been implicated in other studies as being involved
in visual, auditory, memory, and attentional functions. In general, regions that
are coactivated during cognitive tasks also tend to show resting-state connectivity, suggesting that brain regions with common functionality tend to express
similar patterns of spontaneous activity. Combining resting-state and taskrelated connectivity within the same study can strengthen conclusions about
the relationships between brain regions, by building on the findings of one
to explore the other. Moreover, explicit information on the structural connections between brain areas in individual subjects, such as can be obtained with
diffusion tensor imaging (DTI; see Box 2B) can also help with these analyses.
Although finding that two brain areas are both activated during a particular
task indicates that the two regions are related, it does not tell us much about
the form of that relationship. For example, consider a task entailing attending
to a visual scene to search for faces. Such a task (relative to a baseline task)
will elicit enhanced activity in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, the inferior
parietal sulcus, and face-processing areas in ventral occipital cortex. Such a
coactivation might suggest that these various areas are involved in the task,
but we would not know how they work together to accomplish that task. For
example, top-down influences from the prefrontal cortex might be guiding the
activity in the other regions. Another possibility is that visual processing in the
ventral occipital cortex is triggering activity in the other areas in a bottom-up
fashion. On the other hand, the activity in all of these regions may be controlled
by signals from another region of the brain.
A variety of methods have been developed to gain further insight into the
relationships between brain areas and their activation patterns. In one approach

THE METHODS OF COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE

for combining fMRI and behavioral data, psychophysiological interaction (PPI)
analysis is used. Like some other connectivity approaches, PPI analysis uses
the time course of activity in one seed region to predict changes in activity in
another region. However, the technique analyzes how these interactions differ
as a function of the cognitive task being performed. For example, it analyzes
whether the correlation in activity between the two areas, rather than activity
itself, differs in one task versus another.
A significant shortcoming of fMRI (and indeed most other neural activity
monitoring methods) is its difficulty in establishing causality in the interactions
between brain areas—that is, whether activity in one brain area caused activity
in another. Suppose that two regions, A and B, are coactivated in an fMRI study
in a particular task. Is it possible to infer from the fMRI data whether activation
in Region A caused changes in Region B, activation in Region B caused changes
in Region A, or activation in both of these regions was induced by signals from
another brain area?
Some modeling approaches, such as structural equation modeling, have
endeavored to infer causality from fMRI activation patterns by incorporating
known anatomical connections, comparing models with different hypothesized
sets of directional influences between areas, and identifying which model best
accounts for the observed data. For example, an early application of this approach
to studying attention found that the best model for the activation patterns suggested that attention-related signals from the prefrontal cortex increased the
connectivity between the extrastriate visual areas and the posterior parietal
cortex. Related approaches include dynamic causal modeling, which creates
models of the functional connections between brain regions, and then evaluates how that connectivity changes as a result of experimental manipulations.
In summary, delineating the functional connectivity relationships between
brain regions shown to be activated in fMRI tasks is critical for understanding
how these regions work together to accomplish cognitive functions. The ongoing development and application of these various approaches for analyzing
functional connectivity relationships will continue to improve the inferences
that can be made from fMRI data.

Optical brain imaging
Another way to measure neural activity in both animals and humans is based
on optical imaging techniques. These approaches derive from the fact that active brain tissue transmits and/or reflects light differently than does inactive
brain tissue, and these differences can be picked up and imaged by optical
recording devices.
One such approach is, like fMRI, based on hemodynamic changes in response to neural activity. When populations of neurons become active, thereby
inducing local hemodynamic changes, the amount of light reflected from the
cortical surface changes as well. This optical signal, as with the BOLD signal
in fMRI, is thought to arise from changes in the relative concentrations of
oxyhemoglobin and deoxyhemoglobin that occur as neuronal activity varies
in a given region in response to a stimulus. To detect these changes requires
that the skull be opened and the cortical surface illuminated with a red light in
the 580- to 700-nanometer range. The reflected light is picked up by a sensitive
video camera, and the changes in responses to stimulation are averaged over a
series of trials. The resulting images can provide a highly detailed map of the
cortical patterns of activity.
These hemodynamically based optical imaging approaches have been most
successfully applied to studying sensory map representations in the sensory
cortices in animals, particularly in visual sensory cortex. For example, this
type of imaging has produced highly detailed maps of the patterns of relative

■ 45

46 ■ CHAPTER 2
sensitivity across primary visual cortex to specific line orientations (see Chapter
3). These methods have also been useful in showing the relationships between
the mapping configurations for different features, such as the relationship between line orientation preference maps and ocular dominance maps. Because
the technique is invasive, it has been used mostly in experimental animals,
and the results have thus far tended to be more informative in the context of
neurobiology than cognitive neuroscience. Nonetheless, it has been used in a
few circumstances in human patients undergoing neurosurgery (e.g., to map
language areas). Because of its simplicity and relatively low cost, such optical
imaging would seem to have considerable promise for future studies of cognitive
functions in both experimental animals and neurosurgical patients.
Another technique, known as event-related optical signals (EROS), uses
optical methods based on a very different activity-dependent mechanism and
can be applied noninvasively. When brain tissue is illuminated, even through
the skull, the amount of light that is transmitted versus scattered varies as a
function of whether the neuronal tissue is electrically active. This differential
light diffusion is thought to arise from changes that occur in neuronal membranes and their immediate surroundings during electrical activity. By shining
light into the brain from a number of different sources around the head and
measuring the intensity of the reflected light with multiple external sensors,
these activity-dependent changes can be detected and imaged using threedimensional, computer-assisted reconstruction algorithms.
Like ERPs, EROS has high temporal resolution but relatively low spatial
resolution. However, determination of the sources of the measured activity is
not subject to the inverse problem inherent in EEG and MEG source analyses.
Although the relatively low signal-to-noise characteristics have limited the
use of this method, EROS holds significant promise as a useful method for
noninvasively imaging cognition-related cortical activity.

Assembling Evidence and Delineating Mechanisms
A major goal in the quest to understand the neural bases of cognition is to establish links between localized brain structures and neural activity on the one
hand, and cognitive functions or processes on the other. To establish these links
and delineate underlying mechanisms, cognitive neuroscientists often assemble
evidence from multiple studies and data gleaned through the implementation
of multiple methodologies.

Associations and dissociations
One approach to linking neuroscience and cognition is apparent in the methods already discussed: to experimentally associate specific cognitive functions
with the neural structures and/or local neural activity that underlie them. A
complementary approach is to determine cognitive functions and neural processes that do not seem to be related—that is, that are dissociated. For example,
finding that damage to a particular brain area disrupts the performance of
Task A but not Task B establishes not only an association between the damaged area and Task A, but also a dissociation between the lesion and Task B
(Figure 2.16A).
An even firmer link between a specific cognitive function and a particular
neural structure or process can be made by establishing a double dissociation.
For example, suppose Task A is designed to engage mainly System A (say,
the neural system for identifying a visually presented face), whereas Task B
is designed to engage mainly System B (the neural system for identifying the
emotional expression of a visually presented face). If Systems A and B are
relatively distinct, one would expect to be able to find neurological patients

THE METHODS OF COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE

80
60
40
20
0

(B) Two groups of lesion patients
Cognitive performance
(% correct)

Cognitive performance
(% correct)

(A) One group of lesion patients

Region 1
Region damaged

■ 47

80
60
40
20
0

Task A
Task B

Region 1
Region 2
Region damaged

(C) Brain activation

Brain activity
(% signal change)

0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0

Region 1
Region 2
Region activated

Figure 2.16 Associations, dissociations, and double dissociations (A) The relative
performance on two tasks (A and B) for neurological patients with a common brain lesion in Region 1. Impairment in performing Task A but not Task B indicates an association between Region 1 and the neural basis for performing Task A, and a dissociation
between this region and performing Task B. (B) Two groups of patients, one with lesions
as Region 1, as in panel (A), plus another group of patients with lesions in a different
brain region (Region 2) who show the opposite pattern of impairment in the two tasks.
The results from the two patient groups taken together are a double dissociation providing strong evidence for the specific involvement of the two regions in the two different
tasks. (C) Analogous double dissociation determined from brain activation data (e.g.,
from fMRI). In this case, subjects engaged in Task A show activation of Region 1 but not
Region 2; during Task B this pattern is reversed.

with a particular brain lesion who are impaired in performing Task A (recognizing faces), but essentially normal when performing Task B (recognizing
emotions), and to find patients with a lesion in a different brain region who
showed the opposite pattern (normal performance on Task A but impaired
performance on Task B). This pattern of effects constitutes a classic double
dissociation (Figure 2.16B).
Double dissociations provide more definitive evidence for relatively separate
mechanisms or functions than do single dissociations. This is because a single
dissociation could arise from a general factor (such as the relative difficulty of
the tasks) rather than from the engagement of separable functions. However,
when another type of lesion produces the opposite, or at least quite different,
characteristics, the case for the engagement of functionally distinct neural
systems becomes much stronger. It often turns out, however, that the neural
systems being examined are only partially separable; that is, performance on
Task A for a certain patient group is seriously impaired, but performance on
Task B is also disturbed to some degree (or vice versa). This situation would
suggest that the functional systems in question interact to some degree—which
of course is useful information as well.
Although these examples focus on establishing dissociations using brain
lesions, double dissociations are also important in methods that measure brain
activity during cognitive tasks (Figure 2.16C). For example, a neuroimaging
experiment might indicate that a specific brain area (say, Region 1) is activated
during Task A but not during Task B. As with brain lesion studies, however,
this neuroimaging pattern could be due to differing difficulty of the two tasks
or to the degree to which a neural system is being engaged by the task. Thus,
establishing a double dissociation in the context of neuroimaging (i.e., finding
that another brain area, Region 2, is activated during Task B but not during Task
A) is also important for more firmly linking specific brain activity measures to
specific cognitive functions.

48 ■ CHAPTER 2

TABLE 2.1 Summary of the Major Imaging Techniques Used in Cognitive Neuroscience
TECHNIQUE

MAIN ADVANTAGES

MAIN DISADVANTAGES

Naturally occurring
lesions

Can strongly implicate a region as being
essential for a task

Still generally need double dissociation to strongly confirm
selectivity of area

Occur naturally

Not specific to functional areas; variable in distribution and
extent
Do not identify a network
No temporal resolution
Relatively few available subjects; subjects often from
heterogeneous groups
Effects of recovery unknown or complex

Directed lesions

Can strongly implicate a region as being
essential for a task

Can generally be done only in animals; ethical concerns

Can be much more selective than naturally
occurring lesions

Very limited temporal resolution

Can be timed (e.g., before or after training)
Intracranial
stimulation

Can provide rather specific neural
perturbation

Mostly limited to animals and rare clinical circumstances
In humans, clinical concerns, limited locations that can be
stimulated

Transcranial
magnetic
stimulation (TMS)

Advantages of lesions, but transient and
noninvasive (or at least nonsurgical)

Mostly can do only superficial cortex

With single shot, can get some temporal
resolution

Not very focused; stimulates other areas nearby and above
the target area
Even for some superficial brain regions, is too
uncomfortable
Some safety issues, particularly for repetitive TMS (rTMS)

Single-unit
recordings

High spatial and temporal resolution

Picks up only some neurons (typically larger ones)

Very specific (single neurons)

Very invasive; almost completely limited to animals
Typically from only one brain area, thus does not identify a
network or network interactions

Electroencephalography (EEG)

Good temporal resolution

Coarse or problematic spatial resolution

Good for state effects (e.g., arousal, sleep
stages)

Not very specific for information processing or cognitive
function

Noninvasive
Inexpensive, fast, and easy recording
procedures

Multimethodological approaches
All of the individual methods described here provide a way of linking cognitive
processes to underlying brain processes. Each has advantages and disadvantages. The spatial and temporal ranges of these approaches were depicted in
Figure 1.6. The most important advantages and disadvantages of each method
are described in Table 2.1.

THE METHODS OF COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE

■ 49

TABLE 2.1 (continued)
TECHNIQUE

MAIN ADVANTAGES

MAIN DISADVANTAGES

Event-related
potentials (ERPs)

Very high temporal resolution

Coarse or problematic spatial resolution

Noninvasive

Difficult to disentangle multicomponent activity

Inexpensive, fast, and easy recording
procedures

Activity may be associated with but not essential for the
task

Very high temporal resolution

Picks up mainly only sulcal activity

Better localization than ERPs

Limited spatial localization

Noninvasive

Much more expensive than ERPs

Magnetoencephalography (MEG)

Recordings very susceptible to interfering noise
Activity may be associated with but not essential for task
Positron emission
tomography (PET)

Good spatial resolution (three dimensional)

No temporal resolution

Identifies network of regions associated with
task

Cannot do event-related designs (block design only)
Need cyclotron
Need to inject radioactive molecules
Indirect measurement of neuronal activity
Activated areas may be associated with but not essential
for the task

Functional magnetic
resonance imaging
(fMRI)

Very good spatial resolution

Spatial resolution still has limits (e.g., draining veins)

Temporal resolution much better than PET

Temporal resolution still very low (typically a few seconds)

Can do event-related designs

Indirect measurement of neuronal activity

Identifies network of regions associated with
task

Activated areas may be associated with but not essential
for the task

Noninvasive
Optical imaging
(hemodynamic)

Optical imaging
(EROS)

High spatial resolution

Almost exclusively limited to animals

Temporal resolution a bit better than fMRI

Temporal resolution still fairly low (hundreds of milliseconds)

Can do event-related designs

Indirect measurement of neuronal activity

Can image all across a cortical area
simultaneously

Activated areas may be associated with but not essential
for the task

Moderate spatial resolution

Low signal-to-noise ratio; may require multiple sessions or
be able to image only limited brain regions

Good temporal resolution

Mainly sensitive to the more superficial cortical regions

Noninvasive

Activated areas may be associated with but not essential
for the task

The different limitations of each of these methods, as well as their complementary scales, have led to a growing effort to combine approaches in the same
or closely allied studies. For example, hemodynamic measures of brain activity like fMRI are very good at showing which areas of the brain are activated

50 ■ CHAPTER 2
in a given cognitive task or type of event, but they provide relatively limited
temporal resolution (on the order of seconds). Since many cognitive operations
occur on the order of tens or hundreds of milliseconds, fMRI cannot indicate
the timing or sequence of the underlying brain processes. ERPs and MEG, on
the other hand, provide millisecond resolution of evoked brain activity but can
only coarsely localize that activity. Thus, combining information derived from
each of these methodologies with the goal of understanding both the temporal
and spatial characteristics of the underlying brain activity makes good sense.
Information gleaned from different methodologies can be related across
studies to synthesize findings pertinent to particular functions—either retrospectively or prospectively. However, one can also directly combine information across methodologies within the same or linked studies. Although such
combining of data or findings acquired from the different methods is always
attractive in principle, it can be difficult to do in practice, largely because of the
disparate natures of the different methods and the data sets they provide. But
when implemented well, it can be very useful.
An example of combining information derived from different methodologies
is using data from PET or fMRI to help in the source analysis of ERP or MEG
activity. For example, functional activation of specific brain areas during a task
carried out in a functional imaging study indicates the areas that are likely
sources of corresponding ERP or MEG activity in the same task. This information
can be immediately valuable in associating specific ERP effects with fMRI or
PET activations in parallel studies, but it can also be incorporated directly into
source localization analyses and modeling as a priori “constraints,” increasing
the likelihood of obtaining accurate estimates of the ERP or MEG sources. In
addition, since ERP/MEG activity derives mainly from neural current sources
located within the cortex and oriented perpendicularly to the cortical surface
(see the earlier discussion of these methods), extracting the cortical surface
from high-resolution structural MRI images can also provide useful anatomical
constraints for source localization approaches.
Furthermore, researchers are now using MR-compatible EEG systems to
record EEG and fMRI simultaneously in the scanner. The advantage of this
approach, although technically difficult, is that it allows one to analyze how
the differences from trial to trial in one of these measures (e.g., the EEG in a
specific time period) co-vary with the trial-to-trial variations of the other (e.g.,
the fMRI activity in particular regions). This approach thus has the important
advantage of being able to link the activity variations of each of the measures
across time, as opposed to being only able to compare the averaged response
in an EEG session with the averaged response in a separate fMRI session doing
the same task. Accordingly, such simultaneous-recording approaches appear
to hold great promise for cognitive neuroscience research.
Other useful ways to combine these approaches include linking functional
imaging studies in normal individuals with similar studies in patients who
have brain lesions. Another example is to record both fMRI activity and singleunit activity in experimental animals (usually monkeys) engaged in the same
cognitive task. Yet another is to pursue electrophysiological studies in monkeys
and humans using parallel cognitive paradigms. Some electrophysiological
studies in monkeys are now including intracranial recording of both single
units and local cortical field potentials, with one of the aims being to make it
easier to relate the results in experimental animals to the scalp-recorded ERPs
in humans. Still other studies are relating genetic variations and neuroimaging
measures, including task-related responses, to investigate mechanisms related
to certain clinical disorders, as well as to the propensity for having certain
behavioral traits (Box 2C).

THE METHODS OF COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE

■ 51

■ BOX 2C NEUROIMAGING GENOMICS

V

ariations in a gene or segment of
DNA are called polymorphisms,
and these genetic variations can be
associated with a greater risk of various
neurological and psychiatric disorders.
Recent research has also shown that the
expression of genetic variations in the
brain can be manifested in both structural and functional neuroimaging data.
Neuroimaging genomics (or imaging
genomics) refers to the application of
imaging technologies to investigate how
these genes are expressed in the brain.
An example of this sort of approach
used fMRI to study memory in individuals
with varying degrees of risk for Alzheimer’s-type dementia. This risk for dementia
was related to whether the individual carried one genetic form (allele) or another
of a gene known as APOE, with those
whose alleles included one copy of the
variant APOE 4 having an increased risk
relative to those carrying two copies of
the variant APOE 3. During a memory
task, individuals with a copy of APOE 4
showed greater activation in the hippocampus and other memory-related brain
areas (see Chapter 9), relative to those
with only APOE 3. Moreover, the degree
of increased activation varied inversely
with a decline of memory ability over the
following two years, with APOE 4 indi-

viduals who showed greater activation
early having more memory decline later.
Thus, before any clinical signs or symptoms appear, neuroimaging may pick up
subtle brain variations that predict later
functional deficits.
There has also been much interest in
the genetic influences on the transmitter systems involved in various cognitive
functions. Considerable work has been
directed in particular toward understanding the role of genetic variations that
control molecules involved in the synaptic efficacy of the neurotransmitter serotonin. For example, certain genetic alleles
have been associated with greater levels
of serotonin in key brain areas, with such
individuals also showing greater levels of
anxiety in stressful circumstances. Correspondingly, fMRI studies have indicated
that when these individuals are shown
images with strong emotional associations, they display greater increases of
activity in the amygdala, a key emotionprocessing region in the brain (see
Chapter 10), while also producing more
cortisol in the bloodstream (a marker
of stress level). Such results show the
benefits of combining genetic measures,
behavioral measures, and neuroimaging
to studying the neural and physiological
mechanisms related to clinical disorders.

In sum, there are many ways in which the various research methods of
cognitive neuroscience can be effectively combined both within and across
studies. Multimethodological syntheses hold the promise for achieving the
deepest and fullest understanding of the neural processes and mechanisms that
underlie cognitive functions. Moreover, the need to synthesize findings across
methodologies, as well as to maintain a broad interdisciplinary perspective, will
continue even as newer and better methods emerge, as they most certainly will.

Summary
1. The technical approaches that have made it increasingly possible to link the inferences and concepts of cognitive psychology to their neural underpinnings are
diverse and continually improving. The approaches that have been most effective
to date fall into two major categories: brain perturbation and neuromonitoring.
2. Methods that perturb the brain in some way allow inferences to be made about
the role of specific brain areas or brain systems in particular cognitive functions.
Approaches that entail perturbation include the natural disturbances of brain
function that arise from trauma, stroke, or disease; perturbations induced pharmacologically; and perturbations induced by electrical stimulation of relevant
brain regions. The latter methods include direct intracranial electrical stimulation,
mostly in animals, as well as stimulation of brain tissue through the skull using
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) and transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS).

More generally, there is a developing
school of thought that many psychiatric
clinical syndromes represent one end of
a genetic spectrum of individual differences in specific traits. For example,
subclinical levels of obsessive-compulsive disorder traits can be found in
many “normal” individuals, with little of
such tendencies being present in others.
These more subtle trait-related genetic
variations may also have corresponding
manifestations in brain structure and/or
function that may be investigated with
neuroimaging.

References
BOOKHEIMER, S. Y. AND 6 OTHERS (2000)
Patterns of brain activation in people at
risk for Alzheimer’s disease. N. Engl. J.
Med. 343: 450–456.
CASPI, A., A. R. HARIRI, A. HOLMES, R.
UHER AND T. E. MOFFITT (2010) Genetic
sensitivity to the environment: The case
of the serotonin transporter gene and
its implications for studying complex
diseases and traits. Am. J. Psychiatry 167:
509–527.
HARIRI, A. R. (2009) The neurobiology
of individual differences in complex
behavioral traits. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 32:
225–247.

52 ■ CHAPTER 2

Go to the COMPANION WEBSITE
sites.sinauer.com/cogneuro2e
for quizzes, animations, flashcards,
and other study resources.

Additional Reading
Reviews
CHURCHLAND, P. S. AND T. J. SEJNOWSKI
(1988) Perspectives on cognitive neuroscience. Science 242: 741–745.
FOX, P. T. AND M. G. WOLDORFF (1994)
Integrating human brain maps. Curr.
Opin. Neurobiol. 4: 151–156.

3. Methods that measure neural activity during cognitive tasks provide information
about the specific neural activity patterns that are engaged during the processing
of a specific type of stimulus or the performance of a specific cognitive task. The
major activity-measuring techniques associated with cognitive processes include
invasive electrical recording in experimental animals, noninvasive electrical or
magnetic recording in humans, and both noninvasive and invasive imaging methods that depend on altered metabolism and/or blood flow in active brain regions.
4. In single-unit electrophysiological recording, metal electrodes are inserted into
the brain structures of experimental animals to measure the action potentials produced by individual neurons. Animal researchers are also increasingly investigating the nonspike fluctuations in the dendritic local field potentials.
5. Electroencephalography (EEG) is a noninvasive method for recording the brain’s
electrical signals from the scalp, which reflects the volume-conducted dendritic
field potentials. EEG and the event-related potentials (ERPs) that can be extracted
from EEG data via time-locked averaging have been widely used in the study of
human brain activity.
6. EEG and ERPs have counterparts in magnetoencephalography (MEG) and eventrelated field responses (ERFs), which measure magnetic-field fluctuations due to
neuronal currents rather than the associated voltage fluctuations. These methods
all have high temporal resolution but coarse spatial resolution.
7. Techniques of three-dimensional functional brain imaging have revolutionized
cognitive neuroscience with their ability to visualize brain activity during cognitive task performance. The first of these to be widely used, positron emission
tomography (PET), can localize brain activity during extended task blocks, but it
requires the use of radioactive isotopes and has essentially no temporal resolution.
Accordingly, it has been largely supplanted in cognitive research by functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), which has much higher temporal resolution
(although it is still much lower than that of electrophysiological methods) and can
be performed in an event-related way.
8. Much work has been devoted to advancing analytic methods for fMRI in order to
enhance the ability to make inferences from the brain activity patterns. Such methods include using multivoxel pattern analysis to examine consistent variations in
the spatial patterns of activity locally within an area and using repetition suppression to examine the activations of intermingled neural populations within an area.
Considerable research has also been devoted to developing methods to analyze
the functional interactions between different active areas in the brain and how
they work together to accomplish cognitive functions.
9. Optical brain imaging techniques are based on differences in light absorption and
transmission in active brain areas that can be detected and imaged using optical
recording devices.
10. With both brain perturbation studies and brain activity studies, the approach is to
establish which cognitive functions are associated with certain neural structures
or neural activity, and which are dissociated. This linkage of neural and cognitive
processes is made even stronger by establishing double dissociations—that is,
establishing that Task A is associated with neural region 1 but not with region 2
and that Task B is associated with region 2 but not with region 1.
11. Increasingly, different methodologies are being combined in multimethodological
approaches that together can provide greater insight into the neural mechanisms
underlying cognitive processes.

HAMALAINEN, M., R. HARI, R. ILMONEIMI,
J. KNUUTILA AND O. LOUNASMAA (1993)
Magnetoencephalography: Theory,
instrumentation, and applications to
the noninvasive study of human brain
function. Rev. Mod. Phys. 65: 413–423.
HENSON, R. (2005) What can functional
neuroimaging tell the experimental
psychologist? Q. J. Exp. Psychol. 58A:
193–233.

LOGOTHETIS, N. K. (2008) What we can
and cannot do with fMRI. Nature 453:
869–878.
SMITH, S. M. AND 7 OTHERS (2011) Network modeling methods for fMRI.
Neuroimage 54: 875–891.
SUPER, H. AND P. R. ROELFSEMA (2005)
Chronic multiunit recordings in behaving animals: Advantages and limitations. Prog. Brain Res. 147: 263–282.

THE METHODS OF COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE
YIHAR, O, L. I. FENNO, T. J. DAVIDSON, M.
MOGRI AND K. DEISSEROTH (2009) Optogenetics in neural systems. Neuron 71:
9–34.

Important Original Papers
BANDETTINI, P. A., E. C. WONG, R. S.
HINKS, R. S. TIKOFSKY AND J. S. HYDE
(1992) Time course EPI of human brain
function during task activation. Magn.
Reson. Med. 25: 390–397.
BERGER, H. (1929) Uber das Electroenkephalogram des Menschen. Arch.
Psychiatr. Nervenkr. 87: 527–570.
BUROCK, M. A., R. L. BUCKNER, M. G.
WOLDORFF, B. R. ROSEN AND A. M.
DALE (1998) Randomized eventrelated experimental designs allow
for extremely rapid presentation rates
using functional MRI. Neuroreport 9:
3735–3739.
CATON, R. (1875) The electrical currents
of the brain. Brit. Med. J. 2: 278.
DA SILVA, F. H. AND W. S. VAN LEEUWEN
(1977) The cortical source of the alpha
rhythm. Neurosci. Lett. 6: 237–241.
FOX, P. T. AND M. E. RAICHLE (1986) Focal
physiological uncoupling of cerebral
blood flow and oxidative metabolism
during somatosensory stimulation in
human subjects. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 83: 1140–1144.
GRATTON, G. AND 8 OTHERS (1997) Fast
and localized event-related optical
signals (EROS) in the human occipital
cortex: Comparisons with the visual
evoked potential and fMRI. Neuroimage
6: 168–180.
GRILL-SPECTOR, K., T. KUSHNIR, S. EDELMAN, G. AVIDAN, Y. ITZCHAK AND R.

MALACH (1999) Differential processing
of objects under various viewing conditions in the human lateral occipital
complex. Neuron 24: 187–203.
GRINWALD, A., E. LIEKE, R. D. FROSTIG,
C. D. GILBERT AND T. N. WIESEL (1991)
Functional architecture of cortex
revealed by optical imaging of intrinsic
signals. Nature 324: 361–364.
HUBEL, D. H. AND T. N. WIESEL (1959)
Receptive fields of single neurons in
the cat’s striate cortex. J. Neurophysiol.
148: 574–591.
KOURTZI, Z. AND N. KANWISHER (2001)
Representation of perceived object
shape by the human lateral occipital
complex. Science 293: 706–709.
KWONG, K. K. AND 9 OTHERS (1992)
Dynamic magnetic resonance imaging
of human brain activity during primary
sensory stimulation. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 89: 5675–5679.
LOGOTHETIS, N. K., J. PAULS, M. AUGATH,
T. TRINATH AND A. OELTERMANN (2001)
Neurophysiological investigation of
the basis of the fMRI signal. Nature 412:
128–130.
MAGRI, C., U. SCHRIDDE, Y. MURAYAM, S.
PANZERI AND N. K. LOGOTHETIS (2012)
The amplitude and timing of the BOLD
signal reflects the relationship between
local field potential power at different
frequencies. J. Neurosci. 32: 1395–1407.
MOUNTCASTLE, V. B., J. C. LYNCH, A.
GEORGOPOULOS, H. SAKATA AND C.
ACUNA (1975) Posterior parietal association cortex of the monkey: Command functions for operations within
extrapersonal space. J. Neurophysiol. 38:
871–908.

■ 53

OGAWA, S. AND 6 OTHERS (1992) Intrinsic
signal changes accompanying sensory
stimulation: Functional brain mapping
with magnetic resonance imaging. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 89: 5951–5955.
PETERSEN, S. E., P. T. FOX, A. Z. SNYDER
AND M. E. RAICHLE (1990) Activation of
extrastriate and frontal cortical areas
by visual words and word-like stimuli.
Science 249: 1041–1044.
SERENO, M. I. AND 7 OTHERS (1995) Borders of multiple visual areas in humans
revealed by functional magnetic resonance imaging. Science 268: 889–893.
WURTZ, R. H. AND M. E. GOLDBERG (1971)
Superior colliculus cell responses
related to eye movements in awake
monkeys. Science 171: 82–84.

Books
HUETTEL, S. A., A. W. SONG AND G.
MCCARTHY (2009) Functional Magnetic
Resonance Imaging, 2nd Ed. Sunderland,
MA: Sinauer.
LUCK, S. J. (2005) An Introduction to the
Event-Related Potential Technique. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
NUÑEZ, P. L. R. AND R. SRINIVASAN (2005)
Electric Fields of the Brain: The Neurophysics of EEG, 2nd Ed. New York:
Oxford University Press.
RAICHLE, M. E. AND M. I. POSNER (1994)
Images of Mind. New York: Scientific
American Library.
ULLSPERGER, M. AND S. DEBENER (2010)
Simultaneous EEG and fMRI: Recording, Analysis, and Application. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

