5

Motor Systems:
The Organization
of Action
INTRODUCTION
Sensory systems provide the inputs to cognitive processes, and motor
systems deliver the physical behavioral output that expresses cognitive
goals. Thus, understanding the organization of motor systems is essential for understanding the organization of cognitive systems, which ultimately manifest perception, attention, emotion, and the consequences of
decisions in action. All body movements are generated by the stimulation of skeletal muscle fibers by lower motor neurons whose cell bodies
are located in the brainstem and spinal cord. Lower motor neuron activity is coordinated by interneurons in local circuits. Although such local
circuits can produce simple reflexive movements on their own, they are
governed by descending projections from upper motor neurons in the
cerebral cortex and brainstem. These descending influences modulate
the activity of local circuits to produce and coordinate complex sequences of movements that make up purposeful, goal-directed actions. This
higher-order control of movement is mediated by upper motor neurons
in the primary motor cortex and other premotor areas of the frontal and
parietal lobes.
Neurons in motor cortex and premotor areas contribute critically
to cognitive functions such as the planning and initiation of complex
sequences of movements, the selection of behavioral goals for action,
and the learning and remembering of new movement sequences. Thus,
higher motor areas enhance the complexity and efficacy of behavior. All
of these higher motor areas themselves are monitored and modulated
by two other key motor systems—the cerebellum and the basal ganglia. Major functions of the cerebellum are to correct errors in ongoing
movements and to learn new motor skills. Major functions of the basal
ganglia are to gate motor commands and to facilitate simple forms of
learning. The complex neural processing carried out by the basal ganglia
and cerebellum also influences cognitive functions that are not directly
expressed in motor activity, including motivation, emotion, and decision
making.

132 ■ CHAPTER 5

■ INTRODUCTORY BOX APRAXIA

T

he importance of cognition for action is keenly apparent when the
ability to plan movements or carry
out motor programs is compromised.
Such deficits are known as apraxias.
Apraxia—Greek for “without act or
deed”—is a loss of the ability to execute
learned voluntary movements, especially
complex sequences of movements,
despite the motivation and physical capability to perform the actions.
Apraxias can take several forms. Ideomotor apraxia, for example, is an inability
to voluntarily perform a learned action
when presented with the appropriate objects, an inability to imitate what someone
else is doing, or an inability to follow verbal instructions. An afflicted person might
be unable to follow the command to wave
goodbye, but able to properly wave when
a familiar person leaves the room. Or she
might be unable to pantomime combing
her hair when given a comb and asked to
pretend using it, but able to comb her hair
when she wants to.
Ideational apraxia is the inability to
carry out sequential tasks involving the
use of tools or objects in the proper order.
Patients with this form of apraxia might
put on their shoes before putting on
their socks or strike a candle against the
side of a matchbox rather than striking a
match and using it to light the candle.
A particularly vexing form of apraxia is
verbal apraxia, which results in difficulty
producing speech. Verbal apraxia can
afflict both adults and children, the latter
having potentially devastating consequences for learning and socialization.
Although the causes of apraxia remain
largely unknown, ideational and ideomo-

tor apraxia have been linked to damage of
the parietal and premotor cortex, typically
on the language-dominant side. Such
damage can result from neurological
insults such as stroke or ischemia, as in
the case of ideomotor apraxia, or from the
more diffuse degeneration that is associated with diseases such as Alzheimer’s
disease or Parkinson’s disease. Unfortunately, the prognosis for apraxia is rather
grim. Some recovery can be made with
physical therapy or occupational therapy,
particularly in younger patients, yet many
people suffering from apraxia never recover and become dependent on communicative aids and assistive devices. Despite
this rather bleak outlook, some people
with apraxia, particularly children, do recover or adapt to the condition, especially
in its milder forms.

References
GOLDENBERG, G. (2003) Apraxia and
beyond: Life and work of Hugo Liepmann. Cortex 39: 509–525.
HALSBAND, U., J. SCHMITT, M. WEYERS, F.
BINKOFSKI, G. GRÜTZNER AND H.-J. FREUND
(2001) Recognition and imitation of pantomimed motor acts after unilateral parietal
and premotor lesions: A perspective on
apraxia. Neuropsychologia 39: 200–216.
HEILMAN, K. M., R. T. WATSON AND L. J.
GONZALEZ-ROTHI (2007) Praxis. In Textbook
of Clinical Neurology, 3rd Ed., C. G. Goetz
(ed.). Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier, pp.
55–64.
ZADIKOFF, C. AND A. E. LANG (2005)
Apraxia in movement disorders. Brain
128: 1580–1597.

Example of mild apraxia. Actor Daniel Radcliffe, best known for his portrayal of the
young wizard Harry Potter in the film series,
struggles to tie his shoes because of a mild
case of apraxia, sometimes referred to as
dyspraxia.

Motor Control Is Hierarchical
Behavioral and theoretical studies of motor control strongly support a hierarchical model of the neural systems that organize action. The notion of hierarchical
organization is vividly illustrated by the observation that complex movements,
such as signing one’s name, preserve distinctive features such as shape and
style even when performed by different muscle groups. For example, the Russian physiologist Nikolai Bernstein asked people to sign their name with a pen
held in the dominant (usually right) hand, and then with the pen attached near
the wrist, elbow, or shoulder; with the pen attached to the right shoe; and even
with the pen held in the mouth. Although penmanship was clearly sloppier
and larger in scale under these decidedly unnatural conditions, the signature
remained remarkably similar in overall form (Figure 5.1).

MOTOR SYSTEMS: THE ORGANIZATION OF ACTION
(A)

(D)

(B)

(E)

(C)

(F)

■ 133

Figure 5.1 Behavioral evidence for motor programs
These signatures were made with a pen held in the
right hand (A), attached at the right wrist (B), attached
at the elbow (C), attached at the shoulder (D), attached
to the right shoe (E), and held in the teeth (F). Note the
remarkable similarity in form retained by all the signatures. (From Bernstein 1947.)

Such observations support the notion that complex behaviors are organized
at several levels. At the highest level are motor programs, which are sets of
commands to initiate a sequence of movements. Such motor programs are
distinguished by the fact that they are more or less ballistic, in the sense that
they do not strictly depend on incoming sensory information. Moreover, as
demonstrated by Bernstein’s handwriting experiment, motor programs are
independent of the actual muscle groups used to carry them out. Finally, motor
programs originate within the central nervous system itself, rather than arising
directly from sensory signals from the periphery.
By contrast, at the lowest level of the motor control hierarchy are elementary
behavioral units that directly activate muscles. As described in the remainder
of this chapter, a variety of intermediate processing levels intervene between
motor programs and the elementary units of motor control. Such intermediate
processing in the motor system translates motor programs into the precisely
coordinated sequences of motor neuron activation and suppression that are
needed to generate the patterns of muscle contraction and relaxation responsible
for complex behavior.

Anatomical organization of motor systems
Hierarchical models of motor control can be loosely mapped onto neuroanatomically and neurophysiologically distinct elements of the central nervous
system. At a broad level, the neural circuits controlling skeletal movements
can be thought of as being made up of four distinct but interacting subsystems:
lower motor neurons in the spinal cord and brainstem; upper motor neurons
in the cortex and brainstem; the cerebellum; and the basal ganglia (Figure 5.2).
At the lowest level are circuits within the spinal cord and brainstem, composed of lower motor neurons and local circuit neurons. Lower motor neurons

134 ■ CHAPTER 5
Figure 5.2 Overall organization of
the human motor system Four
systems—upper motor neurons in the
cortex and brainstem (blue), lower
motor neurons in the spinal cord
and brainstem (red), the cerebellum
(green), and basal ganglia (brown)—
make essential and distinct contributions to motor control.

UPPER MOTOR NEURONS
Motor Cortex
Planning, initiating, and
directing voluntary movements

BASAL GANGLIA
Gating proper initiation
of movement

Brainstem Centers
Basic movements and
postural control

CEREBELLUM
Sensory-motor
coordination

Local Circuit Neurons
Reflex coordination

LOWER MOTOR
NEURONS

SPINAL CORD AND
BRAINSTEM CIRCUITS

Sensory inputs

Skeletal muscles

in the gray matter of the spinal cord and brainstem send axons out of the
central nervous system to directly innervate skeletal muscle fibers, and they
can be considered synonymous with the elementary behavioral units already
mentioned. Lower motor neurons begin to fire action potentials immediately
preceding contraction of the muscles they innervate; thus, their activity is directly correlated with movement of the relevant body part (Figure 5.3). Motor
neurons involved in fine motor control, such as those used to move the fingers
or control the position of the eyes, innervate far fewer muscle fibers than do
motor neurons involved in gross movements of larger muscles, such as those
used to move the legs during walking and running. Local circuit neurons, on
the other hand, provide synaptic input to lower motor neurons and contribute
to the local coordination of lower motor neuron activity. This is especially
important for the coordination of reflexes engaged by rhythmic activities like
walking and chewing (Box 5A).
At higher levels of the motor system, upper motor neurons in the cerebral
cortex and brainstem provide descending control of local circuitry in the spinal cord and brainstem. The other two components of the motor system—the

Figure 5.3 Activity of lower motor
neurons predicts muscle contraction and ultimately movement In the
example here, the upper trace shows
a recording from a lower motor neuron
that innervates one of the eye muscles, causing the eye to rotate laterally.
Note that the rate of action potentials
is directly correlated with the amplitude and direction of the eye movement. (After Fuchs 1967.)

Action potentials
in lower motor
neuron
Medial
Eye
movement
Lateral
0

40

80

120

160
Time (ms)

200

240

280

320

MOTOR SYSTEMS: THE ORGANIZATION OF ACTION

■ 135

■ BOX 5A REFLEXES, CENTRAL PATTERN GENERATORS,
AND RHYTHMIC BEHAVIORS

T

he fundamental unit of behavior is
the reflex. Reflexes connecting the
muscles to the spinal cord and then
back to the muscles provide simple yet
powerful mechanisms for controlling basic
behavior (Figure A). Key components
are local circuit neurons within the spinal
cord that help connect incoming sensory
information to appropriate motor neurons
that enable movement. In fact, activation of the appropriate sets of local circuit
neurons can generate complex patterns
of muscle contraction and relaxation that
result in rather sophisticated behavior. For
example, the spinal cord (and brainstem)
contains circuits capable of producing
coordinated movements of the limbs with
no input from the brain. Not surprisingly,
these local circuits can also produce and
sustain even more complex movements
that are not simply reflexive responses to
sensory inputs. Experimental work in a
variety of animals has shown that rhythmic movements such as locomotion and
swimming are actually produced by local
spinal cord circuits known as central pattern generators.
Walking, to take a specific example,
is a rhythmic behavior in which each foot
moves from the stance phase, where it is
in contact with the ground, to the swing
phase, in which it is lifted and brought
forward to begin the next stance phase.
These phases of locomotion are associated with bursts of activity in extensor
muscles during the stance phase and in
flexor muscles during the swing phase
(Figure B). Cats that have undergone
surgical transection of the spinal cord
anterior to the motor neurons controlling
the hind limbs can nonetheless walk relatively normally on a treadmill. Their gait
continues to follow the normal stanceswing-stance pattern, and the extensor
and flexor muscles show coordinated
bursts of activity typically associated with
the stance and swing phases in normal
animals (Figure C). Remarkably, cats with
transected spinal cords can also adjust
their walking speed when the treadmill
is sped up or slowed down. When the
sensory fibers entering the spinal cord
via the dorsal roots are cut, however, the
cat can continue to walk on the treadmill
but can no longer adjust its gait or avoid
obstacles.
These experiments, and others like
them, demonstrate that the spinal cord
and brainstem contain circuitry capable
of controlling the timing and coordination

Reflexes and central pattern generators.
(A) A stretch reflex. (Figures B and C on next
page.)

(A)
Sensory
neuron
Motor
neuron

Muscle
spindle
Triceps
Biceps

Passive
stretch

−

Inhibited

Resistance

(Continued on next page)

136 ■ CHAPTER 5

■ BOX 5A (continued)
(B)
Swing

LH

RH

LF

Stance

Flexion

Extension

RF
Flexors
EMG
Extensors

(B) A central pattern generator in the spinal
cord. Electrical recordings from muscles in
the legs of a cat show the relations of stance
(foot planted), swing (foot lifted), and stance
phases of locomotion. (C) After spinal cord
transection, the hind limbs are still able to
walk on a treadmill, and the reciprocal bursts
of action potentials in the flexors and extensors during swing and stance phases are still
evident. (After Pearson and Duysens 1976.)

(C)

Flexors

Stance

of multiple muscles to produce complex
rhythmic movements, that these circuits
can respond to variations in the local
physical environment such as obstacles,
and that the needed processing can be
performed in the absence of any input
from higher brain centers.
Once evolution has generated a neural solution to a particular motor problem, the same mechanisms are often
applied in new contexts to solve similar
problems. Thus, central pattern generators, which evolved originally to mediate basic rhythmic functions such as
swimming, walking, or swallowing, serve
important roles in more complex, often
cognitive, motor behaviors. For example,
spoken language is arguably the most
complex cognitive behavior generated by
the brain, yet all human languages rely
on the same basic motor processes for
generating meaningful utterances (see
Chapter 12). Verbal sequencing, much
like the sequencing of other complex
movement patterns, appears to rely

Level of transection
of spinal cord

Extensors

Swing

on endogenous central pattern generators instantiated in feedback loops
between the cortex and basal ganglia
that are quite similar to the sequences
of neuronal activation in the spinal cord
and brainstem central pattern generators
considered here.

References
CALANCIE, B., B. NEEDHAM-SHROPSHIRE,
P. JACOBS, K. WILLER, G. ZYCH AND B. A.
GREEN (1994) Involuntary stepping after
chronic spinal cord injury. Evidence for a
central rhythm generator for locomotion
in man. Brain 117(Pt. 5): 1143–1159.
FELDMAN, J. L., G. S. MITCHELL AND E. E.
NATTIE (2003) Breathing: Rhythmicity,
plasticity, chemosensitivity. Annu. Rev.
Neurosci. 26: 239–266.
HUNT, C. C. AND S. W. KUFFLER (1951)
Stretch receptor discharges during
muscle contraction. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 113:
298–315.

LIDDELL, E. G. T. AND C. R. SHERRINGTON
(1924) Reflexes in response to stretch
(myotatic reflexes). Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 96:
212–242.
MARDER, E. AND D. BUCHER (2001) Central pattern generators and the control
of rhythmic movements. Curr. Biol. 11:
R986–R996.
PEARSON, K. G. AND J. DUYSENS (1976)
Function of segmental reflexes in the control of stepping in cockroaches and cats.
In Neural Control of Locomotion, Vol. 18, R.
Herman, S. Grillner, P. Stein, and D. Stuart (eds.). New York: Plenum, pp. 519–537.

cerebellum and basal ganglia—modulate the activity of upper motor neurons
in order to make “online” corrections in response to perturbations in ongoing
movements and to help initiate goal-directed movements, respectively. The
localization of motor programs remains an active area of investigation.

MOTOR SYSTEMS: THE ORGANIZATION OF ACTION
(A) Lateral view
Premotor
cortex

Supplementary Primary
motor cortex
motor cortex

■ 137

Medial view
Supplementary
motor cortex

Figure 5.4 Upper motor neuron
pathways (A) The primary motor
cortex and premotor cortical areas.
The primary motor cortex is located in
the precentral gyrus. The motor and
supplemental premotor areas are more
rostral in the frontal lobe. (B) Descending pathways from the primary motor
cortex. Pathway to the spinal cord and
the lateral corticospinal tract in cross
section.

Primary
motor cortex

Cortex
Precentral gyrus
(primary motor cortex)

(B)

Cortical Pathways for
Motor Control
As we saw in the preceding discussion, the spinal cord and brainstem
contain circuitry capable of generating
an array of complex motor behavior.
These subcortical systems serve animals with limited behavioral repertoires quite well, but in primates and
other animals in which evolution has
favored more demanding behaviors,
the brain has evolved correspondingly
complex higher motor centers capable
of initiating and coordinating the local
circuits and lower motor neurons that
generate movements more directly.
Descending projections from the
cerebral cortex to brainstem and spinal cord originate from upper motor neurons within the primary motor cortex and the adjacent premotor
cortical areas, including the premotor
cortex and supplementary motor cortex
(Figure 5.4; see also the Appendix).
In addition to having anatomical differences, the primary motor cortex
is distinguished from other premotor areas by the very low intensity of
current needed to evoke movements
by electrical stimulation. The fact
that low electrical current intensities
applied to primary motor cortex can
evoke movements indicates that the
upper motor neurons of this area have
relatively direct access to local circuit
neurons and lower motor neurons in
the brainstem and spinal cord.
The axons of the upper motor neurons in the primary motor cortex that

Medullary
pyramid

Upper
motor
neuron

Midbrain

Pyramidal
decussation

Pons

Medulla
Pyramid
Lower
motor neuron

Skeletal
muscle

Lateral
corticospinal tract
Spinal cord

138 ■ CHAPTER 5

■ BOX 5B MOTOR CONTROL OF FACIAL EXPRESSIONS

T

he neural control of facial expressions provides a fascinating and
instructive example of how upper
and lower motor neurons are coordinated to generate useful behavior, and
how some aspects of emotion play into
the generation of facial movements. The
muscles of facial expression, including those that elevate the corners of the
lips in a smile and raise the eyebrows in
surprise, are under the direct control of
lower motor neurons in the facial nerve
nucleus in the pons. The projections of
these lower motor neurons to the facial
muscles via cranial nerve VII are strictly
unilateral. Thus, damage to upper motor
neurons in the facial nucleus or to the
nerve itself causes unilateral paralysis of
the muscles of facial expression on that
side (Figure A). In contrast, the upper
motor neurons that initiate and coordinate voluntary facial expressions reside
in the primary motor cortex.
A particularly common, and usually
reversible, form of such facial paralysis known as Bell’s palsy is caused by
inflammation of the facial nerve. Notably, the upper motor neurons controlling
the inferior facial muscles project to the
contralateral pons, and the upper motor
neurons controlling the superior facial
muscles project bilaterally. Thus, damage to the portion of the primary motor
cortex corresponding to movements of
the face results in weakness of the inferior facial muscles on the opposite side,
but movements of the superior facial
muscles are spared.
A second motor pathway more closely linked to emotion contributes to largely
involuntary facial expressions. This
pathway originates in premotor areas in
the prefrontal cortex and basal ganglia,
projects to the hypothalamus, and then
continues to the brainstem reticular
formation, ultimately targeting the facial
motor nuclei in the pons. Activation of
this pathway by an emotional experience
evokes involuntary facial expression,
such as the smile produced upon hearing a joke. Damage to this multisynaptic

(A)
Ipsilateral
primary
motor
cortex

Contralateral
primary
motor
cortex

R

Lesion A

L

A
Upper motor
neuron

Upper motor
neuron–type
facial weakness

Pons

R

L

Lesion B
CN VII

B

R

Lower motor
neuron–type
facial weakness

L

Region of weakness
Lower
motor
neuron

Voluntary and emotional control of facial expression. (A) Anatomical circuit controlling voluntary
facial expression. Lower motor neurons in the pons project to the muscles of the upper and
lower face. Upper motor neurons projecting to the pons are unilateral for the lower face, but
bilateral for the upper face. A unilateral lesion to the facial nucleus in the pons results in complete paralysis of the face on the same side, whereas a unilateral lesion in the lateral part of the
primary motor cortex results in paresis of the lower face on the opposite side due to bilateral
projections serving the upper facial muscles.

innervate neurons in the brainstem, such as those controlling the muscles of
facial expression (Box 5B), branch off at appropriate levels, and those continuing to the spinal cord coalesce and descend through the medullary pyramids (so
named for their triangular appearance) in the pyramidal tract. The majority
of corticospinal fibers cross the midline, or decussate, at the caudal end of the
medulla and enter the lateral corticospinal tract in the spinal cord (see Figure

MOTOR SYSTEMS: THE ORGANIZATION OF ACTION

■ 139

■ BOX 5B (continued)
(B)

Pyramidal
(volitional) smile

Duchenne
(emotional) smile

Volitional
facial
paresis

Emotional
facial
paresis

(C)

(B) Voluntary and emotional paresis of the face. Lesions to the face representation in primary
motor cortex lead to unilateral weakness in smiling on command (left). Lesions to the emotional
pathway for facial expression lead to an inability to smile in response to a joke, while voluntary
smiling remains intact (right). (C) Duchenne de Boulogne’s pioneering study of “faradization,” or
electrical stimulation, of the facial muscles. The patient in the photographs had lost sensation
in the face and thus did not feel the effects of stimulation. Compare the stimulated “smile” (second from left) with the emotional smile (third from left).

“extrapyramidal” pathway (the voluntary
pathway is referred to as the pyramidal pathway because it travels in the
pyramids in the caudal medulla) renders

patients unable to spontaneously express emotions in the face, although they
can still produce symmetrical voluntary
facial expressions (Figure B). Conversely,

5.4B), and they terminate within the gray matter of the cord at levels appropriate
to the distal muscles that they serve. A small minority of corticospinal fibers
remain uncrossed, forming the medial or ventral corticospinal tract; these axons
terminate within the medial spinal cord gray matter on both sides (after crossing
through the spinal cord commissure). These medial corticospinal projections,
as suggested by the loci of their targets, are involved in control of the midline
(proximal) musculature (Figure 5.5).

Organization of the primary motor cortex
Early studies conducted in the late nineteenth century showed that electrical
stimulation of the primary motor cortex in the precentral gyrus on one side of
the primate brain evokes muscle contractions on the opposite side of the body.
This apparently topographical organization of the primary motor cortex was

patients with damage to upper motor
neuron pathways have difficulty voluntarily moving the muscles of the lower part
of the contralateral face but nonetheless can smile, frown, or cry normally in
response to emotional stimulation.
These distinctions between the
pathway for voluntary facial expression and spontaneous, emotional facial
expression were first described by the
French neurologist and physiologist
G. B. A. Duchenne de Boulogne, who
photographed subjects producing facial
expressions in response to direct electrical stimulation of the muscles and in
response to emotional stimulation (Figure
C). Duchenne de Boulogne demonstrated that some facial muscle groups,
such as the orbicularis oculi, can be
activated involuntarily only by subjective
emotional experience—an expression
known as the Duchenne smile. A forced
or voluntary smile does not activate this
muscle group, thus appearing strained
and unnatural. The distinctions between
voluntary and emotional facial expression pathways are often painfully obvious
in the contrived facial expressions worn
when we are less than sincere.

References
BLUMENFELD, H. (2002) Neuroanatomy
through Clinical Cases. Sunderland, MA:
Sinauer.
DARWIN, C. R. (1572) The Expression of the
Emotions in Man and Animals. London:
Murray.
DUCHENNE DE BOULOGNE, G. B. A. (1562)
Mécanisme de la Physionomie Humaine.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

140 ■ CHAPTER 5
Figure 5.5 Organization of the lower motor neurons in
a cross section of the cervical spinal cord Motor neurons innervating proximal muscles (i.e., those closest to the
shoulder) are located medially (close to the midline); those
innervating distal muscles (toward the digits) are located
laterally (to the right or left).
Proximal
muscles

Distal
muscles

confirmed shortly after the start of the twentieth century by Charles Sherrington, who showed that stimulating adjacent regions of the precentral gyrus
in apes elicited movements of adjacent contralateral body parts. The presence
of a topographical map of body musculature in the primary motor cortex was
further verified in humans by Sherrington’s student Wilder Penfield, who, as
a neurosurgeon in the 1930s, systematically stimulated different brain regions
in human patients. Such motor maps revealed with direct electrical stimulation
of the brain are also evident in the blood oxygenation level–dependent (BOLD)
response when subjects are asked to move their lips, finger, thumb, elbow, or
foot (Figure 5.6).
As in the sensory maps described in Chapters 3 and 4, these motor maps
define a distorted representation of the body. A disproportionately large area
of the lateral primary motor cortex was devoted to the lips, tongue, and hands;
and a much smaller area of the dorsal and medial primary motor cortex was
devoted to the lower extremities and genitalia (Figure 5.7). Thus, the amount
of cortical space devoted to motor function corresponds to the capability of
that area to exercise fine motor control, and it underscores the principle that
more sophisticated processing is always reflected in a greater allocation of
cortical space.

Lip

Figure 5.6 Moving different body parts activates different parts
of the primary motor cortex in humans Human subjects lay on their
back in an fMRI scanner with their eyes closed, while their heads and
proximal limbs were secured in order to minimize involuntary movements. Subjects were asked to perform the following movements in
succession: elevate the foot at the ankle, flex and extend the right
elbow, make a fist with the right hand, tap the right thumb and index
finger together, make a fist with the left hand, and purse the lips. The
BOLD signal revealed neural activation most laterally for the lips, most
medially for the foot, and in between for movements of the hands and
fingers—in good accordance with the motor maps generated by intracranial electrical stimulation in human surgical patients. (After Lotze et
al. 2000.)

Index
finger

Lip
Left
fist

Thumb

Elbow
Foot

MOTOR SYSTEMS: THE ORGANIZATION OF ACTION
Shoulder

(A)

Corticospinal
tract

Head

Trunk

Arm

Leg

Hand
Digits
Thumb

Feet

(B)

Toes
Genitalia

Neck
Eyes
Nose
Corticobulbar
tract

Face
Lips

■ 141

Figure 5.7 The distorted map of
the body’s musculature in the primary motor cortex (A) The primary
motor cortex (M1) is located just in
front of the brain’s central sulcus.
Regions controlling motor responses
in different parts of the body are
shown here in relative size and sequence. (B) The proportions of the
homunculus show the parts of the
body relative to their represented
size in the primary motor cortex.
(After Breedlove et al. 2007.)

Jaw
Tongue
Throat

Movement maps in the primary motor cortex
Especially pertinent to understanding how cognitive functions relate to the
generation of motor behavior is the long-standing debate about the role of these
motor maps in producing movement. The question centers largely on whether
the activity of neurons in these motor maps specifies what to do (a motor command) or how to do it—the particular patterns of muscle activity necessary to
generate the forces required for a particular movement.
Early studies in monkeys using low-intensity electrical stimulation suggested
that the primary motor cortex might contain a map of individual muscles.
However, later electrical stimulation studies in monkeys confirmed reports by
Penfield and Sherrington that activation of some portions of the primary motor
cortex evokes coordinated, multijoint movements (Figure 5.8). This observation
is what would be expected, given that descending projections from the primary

(A)

(B)

(D)

(E)

(C)

Figure 5.8 Complex movements evoked by stimulation of the
primary motor cortex in the monkey Each drawing represents the
animal’s posture at the end of the stimulation. (A) Defensive-like
posture of face. (B) Hand to mouth. (C) Manipulation-like shaping of
fingers and movement of hand. (D) Outward reach with hand open,
as if shaping to grasp. (E) Climbing- or leaping-like posture involving
all four limbs. (After Graziano 2006.)

142 ■ CHAPTER 5
(A)

(B)

Implanted
recording electrode

Juice reward
delivery

Response
button (target)

Recording
from cortical
motor neuron

Record

Cortical motor
neuron spike

Spinal
motor
neuron

Restraint chair

Spike-triggered
muscle activity

Muscle activity

Wrist restraint
Time (ms)

Figure 5.9 Determining the role of cortical motor neurons in generating movements (A) Experimental setup for recording from monkey primary motor cortex neurons in relationship to reaching. (B) As indicated in the diagram and sample recording, neurons in the primary motor cortex fire before movements occur. Movement
onset is defined by the increase in the activity of the muscles in the electromyogram
(EMG). (A after Evarts 1981; B after Porter and Lemon 1993.)

motor cortex target mainly local circuits in the brainstem and spinal cord rather
than the lower motor neurons themselves.
Electrophysiological recordings from single neurons in the primary motor
cortex of monkeys have largely supported the conclusion that movements and
not muscles are represented in motor maps. In the late 1960s, neuroscientist
Edward Evarts and his colleagues pioneered the technique of implanting electrodes in the motor cortex of monkeys that had been trained to reach toward
cued targets in order to receive rewards (Figure 5.9A). The electrical signals
generated by neurons were then compared to the muscle fiber action potentials
recorded from the arm muscles, as well as to recordings of the direction and
force generated by the arm during movement (Figure 5.9B). Evarts’s group
found that most neurons in the primary motor cortex fired action potentials
in relation to a subset of movements, and that the firing rate corresponded to
the changes in force generated by the muscles during movement. Moreover,
many of these neurons began to discharge before the movements themselves
were initiated, suggesting that their activation did not cause movement directly.
Commands to move the eyes are generated in a similar set of circuits comprising the frontal eye fields in the cortex and the superior colliculus in the midbrain,
which then project to the brainstem reticular formation, which organizes and
coordinates activation of the extraocular muscles by lower motor neurons in the
brainstem (as discussed earlier). These and other observations are all consistent
with the idea that higher motor centers, including the primary motor cortex
and the frontal eye fields, provide both motor command signals that engage
lower-level circuits to produce coordinated movements and signals that indicate,

MOTOR SYSTEMS: THE ORGANIZATION OF ACTION

■ 143

to some degree, how forceful these movements should be. That is, these upper
motor neurons specify both what to do and how to do it.

Coding Movements by the Activity
of Neuronal Populations
The motor maps discussed in the previous section are essentially gross anatomical descriptions of how the motor system is organized, but how these
maps are related to coordinated movements is not entirely clear. The relatively
coarse tuning of neurons in the primary motor cortex and other higher movement centers presents a problem for understanding how the brain generates
a particular movement. Although the work described in the previous section
provided evidence that maps specify movements, the direction and amplitude
of a movement cannot be predicted with any precision from the activity of single
neurons, which are often activated during a wide array of different movements.
One solution to this problem is the idea that the activity of hundreds or
perhaps thousands of neurons is averaged in computing the desired movement. Early work focused on maps of eye movements because the oculomotor
system, by virtue of its simplicity, is a useful model for sorting out the principles
governing more complex movements. Movements of the eyes are also under
the control of higher movement centers, although the organization of these
pathways is distinct from that of higher pathways that control limb movements.
The study of eye movements is facilitated by the fact that the local circuits
in the brainstem coordinating eye movements are under the direct control of
neurons in the superior colliculus, an easily accessible layered structure in the
midbrain. Electrical stimulation in the intermediate and deep layers of the
superior colliculus in monkeys produces coordinated gaze shifts, and single
neurons in these layers fire action potentials just before the rapid, ballistic
eye movements known as saccades begin (Figure 5.10A). Moreover, electrical stimulation at any site evokes a saccade with a particular direction and

(A) Normal
Neuronal “votes”

Eye movement

40°
20°

B
b

0°

A
a
cC

b
a
c

–20°
–40°

2° 5°

10°

20° 30° 50°

(B) Inactivated

40°
20°

b
B

0°

a
A
cC

–20°
–40°

2° 5°

10°

20° 30° 50°

b
a
c

Figure 5.10 Population coding (A) Topographical map showing eye movements in the
superior colliculus. Movement amplitude is
coded in increasing steps from left to right, and
movement direction is coded on the vertical
axis. The light purple region is the zone of neurons activated preceding a movement 5 degrees
to the right of the zone marked “a.” (B) Pharmacological inactivation of the zone centered
on “b” (red circle) in a monkey results in a shift
in the weighted average of collicular activity, as
well as the endpoint of the eye movement. (After
Lee et al. 1988.)

144 ■ CHAPTER 5
Direct

Delayed

s

s

s

Figure 5.11 Population vectors in the primary motor
cortex Each line indicates the direction and amplitude
of an arm movement decoded from the activity of a
population of neurons recorded in the primary motor
cortex. The time of the trials proceeds from bottom to
top; S indicates the cue for movement, and M indicates
the onset of movement. Movement in direct response
to a cue results in immediate generation of a population
vector specifying the movement. Delayed movement
evokes a population vector specifying the movement
hundreds of milliseconds before movement onset.
(After Georgopolous et al. 1986.)

S

M
Time

amplitude, whereas stimulation at nearby sites evokes saccades with slightly
different vectors. Thus, the superior colliculus contains a topographical map
of eye movements, much like the topographical maps of skeletal movements
in the primary motor cortex (see Figure 5.7A).
Each superior colliculus neuron is thought to vote for its range of movements,
with the weight of the vote cast determined by how strongly the neuron fired.
The weighted votes would then be averaged across the population to arrive
at the vector for the desired movement. To test this idea, small portions of the
map of eye movements in the superior colliculus were reversibly inactivated
in monkeys trained to look toward visual targets for fruit juice rewards. Following inactivation, eye movements were systematically biased away from the
inactivated portion of the collicular map, as would be expected if movements
were specified by the weighted average of the activity of all the neurons in the
superior colliculus (Figure 5.10B). This experiment provided the first functional
support for the notion that the brain achieves precise movements by averaging
together the activation of large populations of coarsely tuned neurons.
The idea that precise movements are encoded by averaging the activity of
many coarsely tuned neurons has been extended to the primary motor cortex.
Neurons in the primary motor cortex are broadly tuned to generate a range of
movement directions and amplitudes, firing strongly for some movements but
weakly or not at all for others. A vector representing the weighted average of
activity across the population of neurons in the motor cortex as a function of
time (Figure 5.11) specifies the impending movement well in advance of any
activity in the muscles. This observation supports the idea that the primary
motor cortex encodes intended movements by the vector average of activity
across the active neuronal population.

Planning Movements
Although many movements are more or less automatic in response to a sensory
stimulus, other actions are planned in advance and their initiation held off until
the circumstances are appropriate for their execution. For example, when monkeys are cued to reach toward a target but are forced to delay initiation of the
reach, neurons in the primary motor cortex become active before the movement
is initiated. Anticipatory activation of neurons during arm movement planning has been observed in a number of premotor areas as well, including the
premotor, supplementary motor, dorsolateral prefrontal, and parietal cortices.
In the case of visual orienting movements, such activity is seen in the frontal
and supplementary eye fields, and in the dorsolateral prefrontal and lateral
parietal cortices. Planning-related activity in premotor areas typically persists
when movement cues are removed and ceases when monkeys are cued to stop

MOTOR SYSTEMS: THE ORGANIZATION OF ACTION

Cue

■ 145

Move
Time

Figure 5.12 Evidence of anticipatory activity as a correlate of movement
intention in the premotor cortex The histogram shows neuronal firing as a function
of time in a monkey cued to reach toward a target after a delay (red). Neuronal activity continues from the cue until the movement, suggesting a neural correlate of the
intention to reach toward the target.

Figure 5.13 Readiness potential
These EEG recordings were taken
from scalp electrodes over premotor
and supplementary motor cortices in
human subjects asked to voluntarily
move a finger. EEG amplitude when
subjects attend to their own movement (blue) increases several seconds
in advance of the actual movement.
EEG amplitude when subjects attend
to the urge to move—the readiness
potential (red)—is enhanced relative
to the movement potential. Readiness
potentials begin later in the contralateral primary motor cortex, consistent
with a hierarchical progression of motor intention. (After Eagleman 2004.)

Amplitude (RV)

planning the movement, thus suggesting a role in intention (Figure 5.12). One
indication of the functional role of these premotor areas is that planning-related
neuronal activity typically begins even earlier in these areas than in the primary
motor cortex (or the superior colliculus for saccades).
These observations support the idea that motor areas are hierarchically
organized, with premotor areas providing more abstract planning information related to behavioral goals, which is then translated into the intention to
perform specific movements in the primary motor cortex (and the superior
colliculus for visual orienting movements). Thus, higher motor areas appear
to serve a functional role in specifying the motor program discussed earlier.
Motor intention signals in the primary motor cortex are then translated by
downstream local circuits in the brainstem and spinal cord into neural activity
that specifies the patterns of muscle contraction necessary to accomplish the
intended movements.
Scalp recordings from humans (see Chapter 2)
have tended to confirm this hierarchical organization of movement planning. When subjects are asked
–10
to voluntarily generate a movement—for example,
lifting a finger at a time of their choosing—EEG
recordings from medial frontal electrodes show a
pronounced negative wave that begins up to several
–5
seconds in advance of the actual movement. This
readiness potential initially begins bilaterally over
premotor areas, but later it becomes enhanced over
the primary motor cortex contralateral to the finger
0
movement (Figure 5.13). Neuroimaging studies have
identified the readiness potential with activation in
premotor areas, particularly the supplementary motor
areas. Interestingly, when premotor areas are damaged
5
along with the primary motor cortex, patients are
unaware of (or even deny) their inability to move—a
phenomenon known as anosognosia, meaning “loss
of awareness.” This clinical observation provides
10
additional evidence that the premotor cortex is the
–1500
–2000
source of motor planning and intentional awareness.

Movement

–1000
–500
Time (ms)

0

500

146 ■ CHAPTER 5
The readiness potential also provides a means of further exploring the role
of awareness in motor planning. In a famous but controversial study conducted
several decades ago by physiologist Benjamin Libet, subjects were asked to produce an uncued voluntary movement and then estimate (from a clock display)
the time at which they became aware of the intention to move. EEG recordings
indicated, not surprisingly, that estimates of the intention to move preceded the
movement itself by about 200 milliseconds. However, readiness potentials over
premotor areas clearly preceded subjects’ awareness of when they intended to
move. Although these results have a number of possible confounding factors,
the study implies that conscious awareness actually follows the intention to
move rather than preceding and thus causing it.

Selecting goals for action
At any given moment, several competing or alternative behavioral goals might
be options for motor planning. For example, on approaching a stoplight that just
turned yellow, a driver might either slow to stop, or accelerate to get through
the intersection before the light turns red. The neural processes responsible for
selecting a course of action to reach a goal (e.g., getting to the destination faster)
and generating the relevant movement have come under increasing scrutiny
as researchers have realized the importance of cognitive contexts for motor
behaviors. Most such studies have focused on the processes that link sensory
information to motor output.
Early electrophysiological studies in monkeys demonstrated that neurons in
a variety of premotor areas where planning-related activity occurs respond to
sensory cues used to guide movements. Moreover, these responses to sensory
cues can be enhanced or diminished if the stimulus is made more or less likely
to be the target of a movement. Subsequent work showed that such sensorymotor linkage is graded by the quality of information guiding the movement
integrated over time. For instance, neurophysiologists William Newsome and
Michael Shadlen provided evidence that neuronal responses in a number of
premotor areas involved in saccadic eye movements are systematically related
to the weight of sensory evidence favoring a particular movement. In these
experiments, monkeys were trained to judge the net direction of motion in
a field of moving dots and report this evaluation by shifting their gaze to a
specific target if they judged the motion to be in one direction and a different
target if they saw motion in the opposite direction (Figure 5.14A). Newsome
and Shadlen systematically manipulated the quality of the evidence favoring
responses to each target by changing the fraction of dots moving coherently
in one direction or another. When about 50 percent of the dots moved in one
direction, monkeys were nearly always correct in their responses; their performance fell to chance levels, however, when less than 5 percent of the dots
moved coherently.
The responses of neurons in the posterior parietal cortex, frontal eye fields,
supplementary eye fields, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, and even superior colliculus were all found to be modulated by the strength of the motion stimulus
favoring a particular eye movement response (Figure 5.14B). When monkeys
were permitted to move their eyes as soon as they had made a decision, the
speed with which neuronal activity in the parietal cortex increased matched the
speed of the monkeys’ eye movement responses. Similar graded responses as
a function of stimulus quality have been reported in the higher-order somatosensory cortex and premotor areas in monkeys trained to report the frequency
of vibration applied to the forearm by pushing a button.
Taken together, these studies imply that neurons in a number of premotor
areas specify movements in a graded manner as sensory evidence is accumulated. This hypothesis was tested directly by applying microstimulation to

MOTOR SYSTEMS: THE ORGANIZATION OF ACTION
(A)

(B)

Go

Motion
Firing rate (spikes/s)

60

Targets
T2

T1

RF

50

40

30

Coherence
High
Medium
Low

20

Figure 5.14 Dependence of a motor response on the weight of evidence
(A) Monkeys performed a visual discrimination task in which, by moving their eyes,
they reported the direction of motion in a field of randomly moving dots. One target
was in the response field (RF) of a neuron in the posterior parietal cortex; the other
was in the opposite visual field. (B) The firing rate of neurons in posterior parietal
cortex increased when monkeys viewed dots moving toward the target in the RF.
The rate of increase over time was directly proportional to motion coherence, or the
weight of evidence favoring an eye movement to the RF target. The relation between
firing rate and motion coherence reflects the integration of motion over time. (After
Roitman and Shadlen 2002.)

the frontal eye fields while monkeys performed the dot discrimination task
illustrated in Figure 5.14A. Stimulation in this area evoked saccadic eye movements at short latencies, but the endpoints of the movements were systematically
biased by the pattern of motion the monkeys saw (Figure 5.15A). Moreover, the
amount of bias gradually increased as monkeys viewed the motion longer, as
well as when the fraction of coherently moving dots was gradually increased
(Figure 5.15B). When the locations of the movement targets were not revealed
(A)

(B)

Magnitude of deviation (degrees)

1.5

Y position (degrees)

5

0
Stimulation + up motion
Stimulation + no motion
Stimulation + down motion
–5

–5

0
5
X position (degrees)

Movement
threshold

70

Delay

Fixation

Movement
threshold

■ 147

10

1.0

0.5

0
100

51.2%
25.6%
6.4%
0.0%

300
Viewing duration (ms)

500

200
0
Aligned to
motion onset

400
–200
0
Aligned to
Time (ms)
saccade

Figure 5.15 Graded conversion of
sensory percepts into action
(A) Monkeys were trained to fixate centrally while observing motion stimuli
that were moving either up or down, or
that had no net motion. Microstimulation of the frontal eye fields evoked eye
movements that were systematically
biased by the direction of viewed motion, thus indicating that ongoing motor planning in this area is influenced
by gradually accumulating motion
information. (B) The magnitude of the
deviation in stimulation-induced eye
movements depended on both motion
coherence of the stimuli and viewing
duration. With higher motion coherence, the rate of deviation in eye position as a function of time increased,
implying that the integration of sensory
evidence over time favors a particular
motor response. Each curve represents a particular percentage of dots
moving coherently. (After Gold and
Shadlen 2000.)

148 ■ CHAPTER 5
in advance of the dot stimulus, however, dot motion had very little effect on
stimulation-evoked saccades.
All told, a variety of observations support the conclusion that motor preparation is a dynamic, competitive process linking sensory information to the
intention to move, and that such processing entails the graded activation of
neurons in a variety of higher-order premotor cortical (and subcortical) areas.

Motivational control of goal selection

Posterior
parietal
cortex

Percentage of T1 choices

(A)

Record

(B)

100

75

50

25

0
Relative eye movement value

Neuronal response (% of maximum)

Although sensory stimulation often indicates which movement should be produced (e.g., the response to the yellow light in the driving example described
in the previous section), people must often select a goal primarily on the basis
of additional, far more complex stimuli, as well as stored information about
the likely state of the environment (in the yellow-light example, the factors
indicating the relative need to get to the destination quickly that influence the
significance of the stimulus). Indeed, when monkeys performed the movingdot task illustrated in Figure 5.14, they reported their judgments not because of
the stimulus per se, but because if they responded, they would receive squirts
of fruit juice—highly desirable treats.
Although behavior is typically directed toward acquiring rewards and
avoiding punishments, very little is understood about the mechanisms that
guide the motor system to select goals that satisfy such biological motivations.
This question was tackled directly in a series of studies by neurobiologists Paul
Glimcher and Michael Platt designed to understand how internal motivations
shape the responses of neurons in the posterior parietal cortex (Figure 5.16).
They trained monkeys to choose between looking at two visually identical lights
and then, across a series of trials, systematically varied either the probability or
the amount of fruit juice reinforcement the monkeys received for looking at one
light versus the other. Platt and Glimcher found that neurons in the posterior
parietal cortex were sensitive to the reward value of shifting gaze to a particular
target, which depended on both the probability and the magnitude of the juice
reward associated with that target.
Neurons in a number of premotor areas, including the dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex, supplementary eye fields, frontal eye fields, and posterior cingulate
cortex have also been found to be sensitive to movement value. Further, fMRI
studies of people choosing between movements of different value have found
similar scaling of activation by movement value. In one study, scientists asked

100

75

50

25

0
Relative eye movement value

Figure 5.16 The sensitivity of premotor neurons to movement values (A) Monkeys
choose to spend time looking at a particular target in direct proportion to the relative
reward value of that action. (B) Neurons in the posterior parietal cortex respond in direct proportion to the relative reward value associated with an eye movement. (After
Platt and Glimcher 1999.)

MOTOR SYSTEMS: THE ORGANIZATION OF ACTION
(A)
SMA
pre-SEF

pre-SEF

(B)

Contrast estimate (arbitrary units)

IPS

6
Ve
Vh
4

2

0

–2
pre-SEF

SMA

people to choose between an eye movement and a hand movement, each of
which varied in value across trials. As expected, people generally tended to
choose the more valuable option. Importantly, activity in the supplementary eye
field (Figure 5.17) tended to vary with the value of the eye movement, whereas
activity in the supplementary motor area tended to vary with the value of the
hand movement, paralleling the findings from single-neuron recording studies
done in monkeys. Together, these studies suggest that selecting a movement
goal involves scaling neuronal responses associated with each possible movement by that movement’s value, thereby biasing the motor system to produce a
movement that best satisfies biological motivations such as acquiring rewards
or avoiding punishments.

Sequential Movements and the Supplementary
Motor Area
The discussion so far has focused on the selection and planning of a single
movement. Clearly, however, the behavioral repertoire of humans and other
animals normally consists of sequences of movements that together constitute
meaningful behaviors that satisfy specific goals. Not surprisingly, regions of
the frontal cortex are specialized to support the production of movement sequences. As a rule, the supplementary motor area, or SMA (also called area 6)
is crucial for generating movements in the absence of explicit sensory cues,
and the premotor cortex is especially important for the production of cued
movements. When the SMA is ablated, monkeys can no longer perform welllearned movements and must instead rely on external cues to tell them which
movement should be performed. The reverse is true for lesions of the premotor
cortex, which selectively disrupt visually guided movements but do not affect

■ 149

Figure 5.17 Action value signals
in the human brain (A) Region of
the supplementary motor area (SMA)
showing correlations with action values
for hand movement (Vh; green) and a
region of presupplementary eye field
(pre-SEF) showing correlations with
action values for eye movements (Ve;
red). IPS, intraparietal sulcus. (B) Average sizes of the effects of eye movement value (red) and hand movement
value (green) extracted from the SEF
and SMA. The effects shown here were
calculated from trials independent of
those used to functionally identify the
region of interest. Note that only Ve
(but not Vh) modulates the signal in the
pre-SEF, and that activity in the SMA
shows the opposite pattern. (After
Wunderlich et al. 2009.)

150 ■ CHAPTER 5
(C)

(B)

(A)

Push

Pull

Push

Pull

Turn

Push

Turn

Pull

Turn

Errors

Turn

Pull

1s

Pull

Push

Push

Turn

Pull

Turn

Push

Pull

Turn

Pull

Push

Turn

Push

Figure 5.18 Neuronal responses
mediating action sequences (A)
The SMA neuron recorded here responds selectively to the sequence
“pull, push, turn.” (B) In this case, the
SMA neuron responds selectively to
the last movement in a sequence,
independent of the type of movement
required. (C) Pharmacological inactivation of the SMA causes errors in
producing learned sequences but not
explicitly cued sequences of movements. (After Tanji and Shima 1994.)

Cued sequence

Learned sequence

1s

Pull

Push

Turn

Pull

Turn

Push

well-learned responses that can be made in the absence of sensory cues. These
results suggest a functional dissociation between the premotor cortex and the
supplementary cortex for producing cued and uncued movements, respectively.
A similar logic applies to the production of movement sequences, which
requires the ability to generate action in the absence of external cues specifying
each individual movement. In an important and revealing experiment, physiologist Jun Tanji and colleagues trained monkeys to make a sequence of arm
movements based on a visual cue. For example, a red light might mean “push,
pull, turn,” whereas a green light might mean “turn, push, pull.” Note that the
visual cues specify which sequence of movements to make rather than cuing
any single movement directly. Tanji and his group then recorded from SMA
neurons while monkeys performed this sequence generation task.
Tanji’s group found that many neurons in the SMA were selectively activated
when a particular action embedded within a sequence was performed (Figure
5.18A). Moreover, many neurons responded only for a particular action sequence,
irrespective of the type of movement (Figure 5.18B). For example, some neurons

MOTOR SYSTEMS: THE ORGANIZATION OF ACTION

SI

VT

(A) Fixed

SI

VT

(B) Sequence

responded to the second movement in the sequence, whereas others responded
to the third. These observations suggest that SMA neurons convey information
needed to guide the production of a sequence of reaching movements. This
supposition was confirmed when Tanji and colleagues reversibly deactivated
the SMA by injecting muscimol, an agonist of the neurotransmitter gammaaminobutyric acid (GABA), thus enhancing local inhibitory connections and
silencing the output neurons. When the SMA was silenced in this way, monkeys
were unable to perform sequences from memory (Figure 5.18C). Transcranial
magnetic stimulation applied over the supplementary motor cortex in humans
(see Chapter 2) also disrupts the production of manual sequences, in accord
with the results in monkeys.
Activation of SMA neurons in monkeys by internally generated sequences
of action is supported by neuroimaging studies in humans demonstrating
preferential activation of the supplementary motor cortex during self-initiated
finger movements, compared with visually triggered movements. Moreover,
such modulations were even stronger when subjects generated sequences of
movements rather than repeating the same movement over and over (Figure
5.19). Together, these observations support the conclusion that the supplementary
motor area provides relatively abstract motor intention signals that control the
internally guided production of sequences of actions, whereas the prefrontal
cortex plays a more important role in the initiation and termination of movement sequences. The primary motor cortex then issues sequences of commands
that activate pools of motor units in the brainstem and spinal cord to produce
the desired movements.

Sensory-Motor Coordination
Another key issue in understanding motor control concerns the transformations
needed to translate spatial and textural information gleaned from sensory inputs into appropriate motor commands. For example, shifting gaze to a visual
target is a relatively trivial computational problem, mainly because the vector
representing the locus of retinal stimulation relative to the fovea is aligned with
the vector representing the amplitude and direction of an eye movement that
directs the fovea to the target. This happy marriage of sensory and motor coordinates does not, however, apply to other sensory-guided movements. Thus,
reaching toward a visible target such as a cup of coffee requires translating the
retinal location of the target into a location anchored to the position of the hand.
To do this, the retinal vector must in some way be combined with information
about the position of the eye in the head, the head’s position with respect to the
rest of the body, and the hand and arm relative to everything else. Similarly
complex coordinate transformations are needed in order to look accurately in
the direction of an auditory stimulus, scratch an itch, walk to a geographically
challenging destination, or undertake innumerable other routine challenges
that require translations from one or more frameworks to another. Thus, in

■ 151

Figure 5.19 Activation of the human
supplementary motor cortex when
subjects intentionally generate
sequences of finger movements
These fMRI data were gathered from a
single human subject asked to repeatedly touch index finger to thumb (A)
or to generate a learned sequence of
finger-to-thumb movements (B), cued
either internally (SI) or by a visual stimulus (VT). (From Deiber et al. 1999.)

152 ■ CHAPTER 5
Figure 5.20 Deficits in visually guided reaching and grasping caused by
parietal lesions (A) The reaching and
grasping of objects is measured by
electrodes hooked up to the subject’s
finger, thumb, and wrist. (B) Lines
connect the precision grip made with
thumb and forefinger for a patient
with parietal lesion (R.V.) and a control
subject. The optimal grasp crosses the
center of mass of the object. (A after
Goodale, http://psychology.uwo.ca/
faculty/goodale/research/index.html;
B after Milner and Goodale 1995.)

(A)

(B)

R.V.

Control

addition to selecting, planning, and initiating movements, neural mechanisms
must use sensory information to compute the appropriate spatial coordinates
for guiding movements.
Several lines of evidence suggest that the parietal cortex is crucial for sensorymotor coordination. In partial support of this idea, damage to the parietal
cortex in humans can disrupt both reaching and saccades—a clinical syndrome
known as optic ataxia. The spatial errors that arise from this condition reveal a
failure to correctly integrate information about the locations of the eye, hand,
and target. Disruptions in sensory-motor integration are also manifest when
patients with parietal lesions attempt to grasp objects (Figure 5.20). Compared
to control subjects without lesions, such patients fail to grasp objects accurately
across their centers of mass. These errors invariably lead to difficulties in actually
picking up objects—a deficit also found in monkeys following pharmacological
inactivation of the parietal cortex.
The observation of such deficits following parietal damage, along with the
observation that damage to the lateral temporal cortex typically disrupts object
identification and naming (anosognosia), led neurobiologists Mel Goodale
and David Milner to suggest that the dorsal visual stream may be particularly
important for using vision to guide movement, whereas the ventral visual
stream may be specialized for object identification (see Chapter 3). Endorsing
this idea, patients with temporal lobe damage may have difficulty describing
the orientation of a mail slot (i.e., vertical or horizontal) but no trouble putting
an envelope into it, while patients with parietal damage typically have no
trouble naming objects, despite finding it difficult to reach for and grasp them.
In sum, lesion data from human patients support the idea that the parietal
cortex is a critical locus for the integration of visual, eye position, and limb
position data necessary to produce coordinated movements of the eyes and
hands. Note, however, that complex computations like transforming retinal
coordinates into object-centered coordinates may not be made explicitly. Because
the circuitry that enables complex motor behavior has evolved simply to associate complex inputs with complex outputs on the basis of evolutionary success,
neuronal computations such as those underlying coordinate transformations
may never be understood explicitly.

Initiation of Movement by the Basal Ganglia
The motor cortex (and for eye movements, the superior colliculus) comprises
a more or less hierarchical set of circuits responsible for selecting, planning,
and initiating sequences of movements that satisfy goals. At the same time, an
important set of subcortical circuits in the basal ganglia appears to serve as a
gating mechanism, inhibiting potential movements until they are fully appro-

MOTOR SYSTEMS: THE ORGANIZATION OF ACTION

■ 153

■ BOX 5C MOTOR SYSTEMS AND INTERVAL TIMING
(A)
Anticipation
function

Unimodal
time schedule
0

1

2

0

1
Time (s)

2

Bimodal
time schedule

75

(B)

Spikes/s

I

n addition to the overall ability of the
brain to adjust numerous functions
to daily cycles of light and dark, it is
essential for humans and other animals
to keep time on much shorter scales,
allowing them to anticipate predictable
events that have biologically important
consequences. Interval timing is the
ability to keep track of time on the order
of seconds to minutes, and nearly all aspects of human behavior require this sort
of temporal judgment. Changing lanes
on a highway, catching a ball, cooking
an omelet, playing a musical instrument,
and telling a joke all require accurate
tracking of temporal intervals.
The dependency of such behaviors
on timing suggests an intimate relationship between the initiation and coordination of action and the sense of time. In
fact, interval timing appears to depend
on neural circuits involved in the coordination and initiation of action, including the basal ganglia and its inputs from
prefrontal cortex, and the cerebellum. For
example, lesions of the basal ganglia (the
substantia nigra, caudate, and putamen
in particular) disrupt the ability of rats to
reproduce temporal intervals by pressing
a bar. Further, patients with damage to
the basal ganglia (e.g., in Huntington’s or
Parkinson’s disease) show increased variability in timing tasks in both millisecond
and second ranges. Endorsing a role for
basal ganglia function in interval timing is
the observation that dopaminergic drugs
systematically speed up or slow down
the sense of the passage of time, as revealed by the behavior of humans or rats
instructed to reproduce elapsed temporal
intervals. Other brain regions involved
in motor coordination also appear to be
involved in timing. Patients with cerebellar
damage perform various time production and discrimination tasks poorly when
they receive no feedback about the accuracy of their responses.
The close link between timing and
motor behavior is also evident in the
buildup of activity in neurons in the lateral intraparietal area (LIP) when monkeys plan a saccadic eye movement
at a specific time. LIP neurons typically
ramp up their activity in anticipation of
movement initiation, reaching a peak

50

25
0

Timing signals in evolving motor commands. Monkeys waited for a “go” cue to initiate a saccadic eye movement to a target to receive a juice reward. In separate blocks of trials, the “go”
signal was either unimodally distributed or bimodally distributed in time. (A) Behavioral anticipation functions computed from reaction times for the unimodal (purple) and the bimodal (red)
time schedule, demonstrating that monkeys had an internal sense of when movements were
most likely to be requested. (B) Average neural activity recorded during waiting period for the
“go” signal under the bimodal (red) and the unimodal (purple) time schedule.
(After Janssen and Shadlen 2005.)

just at movement onset (Figure A). When
monkeys are confronted with different
temporal dependencies, or hazard rates,
between the onset of cues specifying
where and when to move, the buildup
of activity in LIP neurons anticipates
the “go” cue, thus betraying the monkey’s sense of elapsing time (Figure B).
Such signals may be critical for initiating
ballistic movements under time pressure—whether catching an insect to eat,
swinging at a 90-mile-per-hour fastball,
or flatpicking a guitar. Together, the
behavioral and neurobiological evidence
suggests that motor systems take advantage of the temporal structure of the
environment to anticipate, initiate, and
coordinate behavior and, further, that
such processes may be responsible for
our own subjective sense of time.

priate for the circumstances in which they are to be executed. By helping to
coordinate movement timing, the basal ganglia also appear to play an important
role in the subjective sense of time (Box 5C).

References
BEHUSI, C. V. AND W. H. MECK (2005) What
makes us tick? Functional and neural
mechanisms of interval timing. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 6: 755–765.
IVRY, R. B. (1996) The representation of
temporal information in perception and
motor control. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol.
6: 851–857.
JANSSEN, P. AND M. N. SHADLEN (2005)
A representation of the hazard rate of
elapsed time in macaque area LIP. Nat.
Neurosci. 8: 235–251.
JAZAYERI, M. AND M. N. SHADLEN (2010)
Temporal context calibrates interval timing. Nat. Neurosci. 13: 1020–1026.

154 ■ CHAPTER 5
(A)

(B)

Cerebrum

+

VA/VL complex
of thalamus

Cortex

Motor cortex

Striatum

+
Caudate
nucleus
Substantia nigra
pars compacta

Caudate and
putamen

Putamen

−
−
Globus
pallidus,
external
and internal
segments

Globus pallidus
and substantia
nigra pars
reticulata

Subthalamic
nucleus
Subthalamic
nuclei

+
−

Midbrain
Substantia nigra
pars compacta

Thalamus

Substantia nigra
pars reticulata

Figure 5.21 The basal ganglia loop that starts and stops movements (A) Coronal
section through the human forebrain showing the principal components of the basal
ganglia. The caudate and putamen (orange) are the zones receiving the main inputs
to the basal ganglia. The globus pallidus (purple) provides the principal output, which
projects to the ventral anterior and ventrolateral (VA/VL) nuclear complex of the thalamus, which in turn projects to the motor cortex. The substantia nigra pars reticulata
in the midbrain serves as the output nucleus for the basal ganglia circuits controlling eye movements. (B) Pro-jections from the cortex excite neurons in the caudate
and putamen, which then inhibit neurons in the globus pallidus and substantia nigra
pars reticulata. This effect suppresses tonic inhibition of the thalamus by the globus
pallidus, thereby further exciting the cortex. The substantia nigra pars compacta provides modulatory dopaminergic inputs to the basal ganglia, and a circuit through the
subthalamic nucleus serves a secondary role in releasing movement.

The basal ganglia are made up of three principal nuclei: the caudate and
putamen (known collectively as the striatum), and the globus pallidus (Figure
5.21A). In addition, two other nuclei—the subthalamic nucleus and the substantia
nigra pars compacta—make important contributions to basal ganglia function.
Nearly all cortical areas project to the basal ganglia, principally through the
caudate and putamen. The globus pallidus is the output nucleus of the basal
ganglia and modulates the activity of cortical neurons via a relay through the
thalamus. Activation of the caudate and putamen inhibits the globus pallidus,
thereby releasing the thalamus and its cortical targets from tonic inhibition
(Figure 5.21B). The net effect of basal ganglia activation is thus excitation of
cortical neurons. The balance of excitatory and inhibitory effects of the basal
ganglia releases and coordinates desired movements. Circuits projecting through
the caudate to the substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr) and on to the superior
colliculus serve a similar braking function for saccades.

MOTOR SYSTEMS: THE ORGANIZATION OF ACTION
Caudate nucleus
Record

1

1 Caudate nucleus

2 Substantia nigra
pars reticulata

Substantia
nigra pars
reticulata

Superior colliculus
Record

3
3 Superior colliculus

−
+
4
−

+

Record

4 Eye movement

2

Projections to horizontal
and vertical gaze centers

The role of the basal ganglia in movement inhibition and initiation has been
examined directly in monkeys trained to make eye movements to visible and
remembered targets while recording from neurons in the SNr, the analogue of
the globus pallidus output circuit for eye movements. In one study, SNr neurons fired tonically until just before saccade onset, when they abruptly ceased
firing for the duration of the movement (Figure 5.22). At about the same time,
neurons in the superior colliculus associated with the saccade began firing
action potentials.
When the superior colliculus is released from tonic inhibition by injection of
the GABA agonist muscimol into the SNr, monkeys cannot suppress unwanted
saccades. These results indicate that one important function of the basal ganglia
is to inhibit undesired movements and permit desired ones. More recent work,
however, has suggested that this “braking function” is not all or none. When

■ 155

Figure 5.22 The superior colliculus–basal ganglia relationship Neurons in the caudate nucleus fire bursts
of action potentials just before eye
movement initiation (1). Immediately
thereafter, neurons in the substantia
nigra pars reticulata shut down (2),
resulting in a burst of action potentials
in the superior colliculus (3) and the
production of an eye movement (4).
(After Hikosaka and Wurtz 1989.)

156 ■ CHAPTER 5
the rewards delivered for successful saccade performance are varied, neurons
in the caudate nucleus show graded changes in firing rate that correspond to
reward size. Similar reward-dependent modulations are apparent in the firing
rates of SNr neurons. Thus, graded changes in the net activation of basal ganglia
circuits may help ensure that biologically valuable movements are produced.
The importance of the basal ganglia for motor control and initiation is vividly
evident in two relatively common neurological disorders: Parkinson’s disease
and Huntington’s disease. In Parkinson’s disease, the selective death of neurons
in the substantia nigra pars compacta that use the neurotransmitter dopamine
increases the excitatory tone of the direct pathway through the basal ganglia.
Patients with Parkinson’s show a marked disruption in the ability to initiate
voluntary movement. In addition to the tremor at rest that is characteristic of
this disease, these patients have difficulty generating purposeful movements
and often show a slow, shuffling gait as a result. By contrast, when their movements are guided by more immediate sensory stimuli, such as marks on the
floor that the patient is asked to step over, gait appears relatively normal. A
primary treatment for Parkinson’s disease remains supplementation of dopamine
levels with L-dopa, a synthetic precursor to dopamine. This augmentation of
dopamine function helps restore the ability of the basal ganglia to release tonic
inhibition from the thalamus, thereby enhancing motor cortex excitability and
improving motor function. Chronic treatment with the drug, however, can lead
to cognitive problems.
In contrast to Parkinson’s disease, Huntington’s disease involves hereditary
atrophy of the caudate nucleus. Patients with Huntington’s typically have signs
and symptoms that are the opposite of those seen in Parkinson’s disease. They
exhibit choreiform (dancelike) movements of the trunk and extremities that they
are unable to control. They also suffer a gradual onset of psychotic thought
patterns and eventually dementia. We can understand these symptoms by
considering the net inhibitory effect of caudate projections through the indirect
pathway described already. Damage to this pathway releases potential movements from inhibition, thus resulting in the production of unwanted actions.
Another basal ganglia syndrome, hemiballismus, ensues from unilateral
damage to the subthalamic nucleus. This neurological insult causes choreiform
movements of the contralateral limbs resembling those in Huntington’s disease.
Thus, electrophysiological, pharmacological, and neurological patient data all
support the idea that a main function of the basal ganglia is to gate the production of movements directed to specific goals.

Basal Ganglia and Cognition
The motor deficits associated with basal ganglia dysfunction, tragically evident
in Parkinson’s and Huntington’s diseases, lead inexorably to the conclusion that
these structures play a critical role in gating movement. Some of the problems
with these diseases and their treatment, however, seem explicitly cognitive,
and recent neurophysiological and neuroimaging findings appear to confirm
this implication. Anatomical studies have also demonstrated the existence of
several nonmotor pathways through the basal ganglia, including a limbic or
emotional channel and an associative or cognitive channel (Figure 5.23).
These separate pathways appear to serve distinct but related functions in
emotion and cognition, and these roles are especially prominent in humans
and other primates. According to this view, the same principles governing
movement disinhibition in the motor pathway apply to emotional or cognitive
processing in the limbic and associative channels. Each channel thus comprises
a feedback loop beginning in the cortex, projecting through the basal ganglia,
and ultimately providing excitatory feedback to the cortex. In this model, cortical

MOTOR SYSTEMS: THE ORGANIZATION OF ACTION
(B) Limbic (emotional) network

(A) Sensory-motor network
Sensorymotor
cortices

Dopamine
neurons

Prefrontal and
parietal association
cortices

Orbital and
ventral prefrontal
cortex

Motor
pallidum

Thalamus

Thalamus

Thalamus

Sensorymotor
striatum

(C) Associative (cognitive) network

Limbic
striatum

Limbic
pallidum

Dopamine
neurons

Figure 5.23 The motor model of basal ganglia contributions to emotion and cognition (A) The basal ganglia influence movement via a sensory-motor network from
the cortex, through the basal ganglia and thalamus, and back to the cortex. This
network disinhibits desired movements. (B) The basal ganglia contribute to emotional
function via an analogous limbic network, beginning in orbital and ventral prefrontal
cortex, projecting through the ventral or limbic striatum, through the thalamus, and
back to the cortex. (C) The basal ganglia may contribute to cognitive function via a
similar associative feedback loop between association cortex and the basal ganglia.
The action of all three networks is enhanced by projections from midbrain dopamine
neurons. (After Yin and Knowlton 2006.)

inputs to the basal ganglia serve as a source of potential variability in behavior,
and the basal ganglia themselves contribute to the selection of behavior on the
basis of prior outcomes.
This framework helps explain some of the nonmotor consequences of basal
ganglia dysfunction. For example, animals with lesions of the basal ganglia,
particularly the caudate and putamen, can perform movements but cannot
perform or learn new actions to acquire rewards or avoid punishments. Patients
with Parkinson’s disease, who exhibit diminished basal ganglia functioning
because of dopaminergic dysfunction, also show impairments in probabilistic
classification tasks that require subjects to make predictions based on a series of
cues. Similar impairments in learning and memory follow damage to prefrontal regions projecting to the associative basal ganglia pathway, and, as noted,
one of the hallmarks of Huntington’s disease is psychotic thought processes.
The ability to produce learned sequences of movements is also disrupted in
patients with damage to the basal ganglia, and this disruption is evident in
both Parkinson’s disease and Huntington’s disease.
Neuroimaging studies have confirmed that the basal ganglia are activated
when human subjects learn new movement sequences. In one typical study,
subjects were asked to perform a task in which they were required to manipulate a joystick with the right hand (Figure 5.24A). During some blocks of trials,
the mapping between the joystick movement and the direction of movement
of a target cursor on a computer screen was shifted by 90 degrees. When
brain activity was compared between blocks of trials requiring such motor

Associative
striatum

Dopamine
neurons

Associative
pallidum

■ 157

158 ■ CHAPTER 5
(A)

Learn (L)

R

P

L

Pace (P)

R

R

P

R

View (V)

V

R

R

Rest (R)

R

R

R

R

R

Time
0 s 40 s 1 min 20 s

32 min 40 s

(B)

A

A

Figure 5.24 The contribution of the basal ganglia to motor learning (A) Human
subjects grasped a joystick to move a cursor on a computer screen. In some blocks
of trials (“Learn”), the direction of cursor movement and the direction of joystick
movement were offset by 90 degrees. In other blocks of trials, subjects simply
moved the cursor without feedback (“Pace”), watched the cursor move by itself
(“View”), or rested (“Rest”). (B) Functional MRI activation during motor learning was
strongest in the putamen (circled). (After Graydon et al. 2005.)

adaptation and blocks of trials in which movements were produced without
visual feedback, the putamen was selectively activated (Figure 5.24B). These
observations, and others like them, endorse the idea that the basal ganglia play
a broad role in linking sensory events and motor actions, while also helping to
suppress undesirable movements and to initiate movements that satisfy goals.
Neurophysiological studies in animals, as well as neuroimaging in humans,
have also demonstrated that basal ganglia neurons are modulated by the anticipation of reward, thus linking this network to the adaptive modification of
behavior based on outcomes—the computational basis of reinforcement learning
(see Chapters 10 and 14). Such studies also suggest that addictive behavior could
reflect the “hijacking” of this basal ganglia system by chemicals that activate
receptors associated with reward. Specifically, cue-induced craving could ensue
from the unconscious association of environmental cues present during drug
consumption with pathological reward modulation of basal ganglia cognitive

MOTOR SYSTEMS: THE ORGANIZATION OF ACTION

■ 159

(A)
Caudate
nucleus

Internal
capsule

(B)

Putamen
Spinocerebellum

Thalamus
Midbrain
Superior
Middle
Inferior

Vermis

Cerebellar
peduncles

Cerebrocerebellum
Cerebrocerebellum

Fastigial nucleus
Interposed nuclei
Dentate nucleus

Deep
cerebellar
nuclei

Vestibulocerebellum

Figure 5.25 Organization of the cerebellum (A) The cerebellum consists of an
outer cortex of neurons, deep nuclei, and large fiber tracts, known as peduncles,
coursing in and out. Inputs to the cerebellum arrive via the middle and superior cerebellar peduncles, and the deep nuclei project out of the cerebellum via the inferior
and superior cerebellar peduncles. (B) The cerebellar cortex can be divided into the
spinocerebellum, which receives inputs from the spinal cord; the cerebrocerebellum,
which receives inputs from the cerebral cortex via the pons; and the vestibulocerebellum, consisting of the flocculus and nodulus, which receives inputs from the vestibular nuclei. The spinocerebellum is organized topographically according to inputs
from spinal cord neurons carrying proprioceptive information. In contrast with upper
motor neurons of the cortex and basal ganglia, cerebellar circuits mediate movements of the ipsilateral musculature.

pattern generators. In any event, these and other studies hint at the powerful
influence of the basal ganglia on a wide range of cognitive behavior.

Error Correction and Motor Coordination
by the Cerebellum
Circuits within the brainstem help coordinate lower-level reflex circuits in the
spinal cord and brainstem motor nuclei to make the anticipatory postural adjustments needed to accommodate movements, correct posture for ongoing changes
in balance, and coordinate more complex multijoint movements. Supplementing the brainstem circuits that mediate these aspects of motor coordination,
another specialized set of neural circuitry has evolved to provide additional
control of sensory-motor interactions. The key component at the center of this
circuitry is the cerebellum, a large, foliated structure that sits atop the pons
in the brainstem (Figure 5.25). The cerebellum is responsible for online error
corrections necessary to produce smoothly coordinated, skilled movements.
Exquisitely organized circuits of specialized neurons within the cerebellar
cortex (Figure 5.26A) appear to compute the net error between ongoing motor
commands issued by the motor cortex and the actual movements being produced. These error signals are relayed back to the frontal and parietal cortices
via projections from the dentate nucleus (the deep nuclear output structure for

Nodulus

Flocculus

160 ■ CHAPTER 5
Midline

(A)
Frontal
motor and
parietal cortices

Middle cerebellar
peduncle

Pons

Cerebellar cortex

Inferior
cerebellar
peduncle

Inferior
olive

Spinal
cord

Vestibular
nucleus

Midline

(B)
Primary motor
and premotor
cortices

Ventrolateral
complex
(thalamus)

Cerebellar cortex

Deep cerebellar nuclei

Superior
cerebellar
peduncle

Figure 5.26 Cerebellar inputs and outputs These block diagrams illustrate the
inputs (A) and major outputs (B) of the cerebellum.

the cerebrocerebellum) to the ventrolateral complex of the thalamus (Figure
5.26B). As a result, damage to the cerebellum causes an inability to perform
smooth movements.
Lesions of the medial cerebellar vermis result in a condition known as truncal ataxia (uncoordinated, disorganized movement), which is characterized by
a wide-based, unsteady gait similar to that of someone who has had too much
alcohol to drink. Damage to the lateral cerebellum, on the other hand, disrupts
the sensory coordination of limb movements and is known as appendicular ataxia.
A useful clinical test of appendicular ataxia requires patients to point from
their nose to the clinician’s finger and back again (Figure 5.27). Patients with
damage to the ipsilateral cerebellum show halting, uncoordinated movements
of the hand and arm; this deficit is called intention tremor because it is evident
only during voluntary movements. The jerky movements of appendicular
ataxia appear to result from disruptions in the normal smooth compensation
for ongoing errors in finger trajectory.
The role of the cerebellum in correcting ongoing errors in order to coordinate
smooth movement extends to correcting errors during motor learning. In short,

MOTOR SYSTEMS: THE ORGANIZATION OF ACTION
(A)

(B)

Figure 5.27 Cerebellar ataxia Patients are asked to point rapidly from the clinician’s finger to their own nose and back again. (A) Normal subjects point smoothly
and rapidly from nose to finger and back again. (B) Patients with cerebellar ataxia
produce irregular, jerky movements, known as intention tremor, when reaching from
nose to finger and back again. (After Blumenfeld 2010.)

lesions that damage the cerebellum disrupt the ability to learn new motor skills.
Moreover, the cerebellum is activated during motor learning. When subjects are
asked to track a target on a computer screen and the target randomly jumps to
another position at the end of each trial, motor error during tracking is initially
quite large but improves with practice (Figure 5.28). Activation in the cerebellum parallels this change in performance, peaking during initial learning and
declining with improvement in performance.

Cerebellar Contributions to Cognitive Behavior
Traditionally, the cerebellum and its canonical circuitry have been considered
a strictly motor structure providing error correction during motor acts and
motor learning. With the advent of modern neuroimaging, however, it has become increasingly clear that the cerebellum contributes to cognitive processing

■ 161

162 ■ CHAPTER 5
(A)

Tracking error on screen
(degrees)

25

All subjects averaged
Test

20
15
10

Baseline

5
0

0

1

2

3

4
6
7
5
Number of sessions

8

9

10

11

(B)

1

5

9

Brain activation:
Low

High

Figure 5.28 Changes in the cerebellum during motor learning (A) Subjects
tracked a target on a computer screen using a mouse. During test sessions, the cursor was rotated 120 degrees about the center of the screen, thus requiring motor
learning. In baseline sessions, the cursor remained unrotated. Improvements in the
average performance of subjects over time in test sessions indicate motor learning.
(B) The corresponding brain activation maps show significant activation in test sessions (decreasing from left to right) relative to baseline during learning. Activity in the
cerebellum decreased with motor learning. (After Imamizu et al. 2000.)

as well. Portions of the cerebellum are activated during nonmotor learning,
attention, timing, and verbal working memory tasks. Furthermore, recent
neuropsychological studies of patients with cerebellar damage have reported
deficits in speech, learning rates, timing, and working memory. Problems in
orienting attention in autistic individuals have also been linked to abnormalities in the cerebellum.
Despite all this evidence, it is not clear how or why the cerebellum participates
in cognitive functions. One proposal is that the computational power of the
cerebellum as an efficient and accurate error correction device has simply been
harnessed to serve cognitive functions that also require error correction (Figure
5.29). This model assumes that the cellular architecture repeated throughout the
cerebellum can be used to perform the same computation on any set of inputs.
For the motor system, these inputs would arise in the primary and premotor
cortices, and the output would be a feedforward prediction of the sensory consequences of the impending movement. For cognitive tasks, the inputs would
arise in the prefrontal cortex and specify intended cognitive operations, and the
output would be the predicted cognitive consequences of the operation. Such
predictions would then be compared against actual cognitive consequences,
and the resulting error signals would be used to update both future cognitive
operations and the internal models of their outcomes.
Support for this general class of models comes from the observation that,
in addition to the heavy inputs from the motor and premotor cortices, the
prefrontal cortex has massive connections to the cerebellum via the pontine
nuclei. In fact, prefrontal inputs to the cerebellum in humans are at least as
prominent as inputs from motor and premotor cortex. Moreover, prefrontal

MOTOR SYSTEMS: THE ORGANIZATION OF ACTION

Figure 5.29 Model of cerebellar contributions to cognition (A) The canonical circuitry of the cerebellar cortex. Inputs to the
cerebellar cortex arrive from the pons and
inferior olive, a brainstem relay nucleus.
(B) Model of cerebellar feedforward simulation and error correction of motor commands. The cerebellum computes the
predicted sensory consequences of movement. The error between the predicted
and actual consequences of movement
is then fed back into the cerebellum to
update future predictions. (C) The same
model applied to cognitive processing. The
cerebellum computes the predicted cognitive consequences of cognitive operations,
and the error between predicted and actual
cognitive outcomes is used to refine future
predictions. (After Ramnani 2006.)

(A)

Output
Input from
pons

Input from
inferior olive
(C)

(B)
Primary motor
cortex

Thalamus

Prefrontal
cortex

Thalamus

Spinal cord
and musculoskeletal system

Cerebellum

Prefrontal
target
areas

Cerebellum

Motor output
and sensory
consequences

Predicted
sensory
consequences

Information
output and
cognitive
consequences

Predicted
cognitive
consequences

Comparison

Comparison

Error
signal

■ 163

Error
signal

inputs to the cerebellum are more developed in humans than in non-human
primates, and these differences parallel differences in cognitive complexity
across species (see Chapter 15). Cognitive operations instantiated in prefrontal
circuits feeding to the cerebellum might rely on the highly stereotyped cellular architecture of the cerebellum to provide fast, accurate, and automatic
“simulations” of the output of these cognitive operations. This conjecture is
supported by the observation that prefrontal circuits show reduced activation
during the course of learning, whereas cerebellar circuits become more active.
The cerebellum may thus provide another example in which neural circuitry
originally adapted to one purpose is co-opted for another; that is, the circuitry
for motor control (see Figure 5.29B) is co-opted for use in cognitive information
processing (see Figure 5.29C).

164 ■ CHAPTER 5

Summary

Go to the COMPANION WEBSITE
sites.sinauer.com/cogneuro2e
for quizzes, animations, flashcards,
and other study resources.

Additional Reading
Reviews
ANDERSEN, R. A. AND H. CUI (2009) Intention, action planning, and decision
making in parietal-frontal circuits.
Neuron 63: 568–583.
BURKE, R. E. (1981) Motor units: Anatomy, physiology, and functional organization. In Handbook of Physiology,
Section 1: The Nervous System, Vol. 2,
Part 1, V. B. Brooks (ed.). Bethesda,
MD: American Physiological Society,
pp. 345–422.
COHEN, Y. E. AND R. A. ANDERSEN (2002)
A common reference frame for movement plans in the posterior parietal cortex. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3: 553–562.
DUM, R. P. AND P. L. STRICK (2002) Motor
areas in the frontal lobe of the primate.
Physiol. Behav. 77: 677–682.
FIEZ, J. A. (1996) Cerebellar contributions
to cognition. Neuron 16: 13–15.
GAHERY, Y. AND J. MASSION (1981) Coordination between posture and movement. Trends Neurosci. 4: 199–202.
GEORGOPOULOS, A. P., M. TAIRA AND A.
LUKASHIN (1993) Cognitive neurophysiology of the motor cortex. Science 260:
47–52.
GRILLNER, S. AND P. WALLEN (1985) Central pattern generators for locomotion,

1. Motor control is hierarchical. Lower motor neurons in the spinal cord and brainstem are the final common pathway for the motor commands that determine
behaviors arising from skeletal muscle movements, and they are thus the effectors
for many cognitive processes. Upper motor neurons in the primary motor cortex
and cortical premotor areas issue motor commands that activate local circuits and
lower motor neuron pools to achieve more specific behavioral goals.
2. Descending pathways from the motor and premotor cortices are important in
planning and initiating voluntary, goal-directed sequences of movement, especially for learned motor skills. Of special relevance here, these circuits are sensitive to
motivational goals that guide movement selection.
3. The motor and premotor cortices are under the modulatory influence of the basal
ganglia and cerebellum. The basal ganglia control the initiation and stopping of
movements and contribute to motor skill learning, the production of movement
sequences, and the selection of movements that satisfy behavioral goals. The cerebellum acts further to coordinate movements by correcting unanticipated errors
in ongoing motor processing in the motor and premotor cortices.
4. Acting together, the various motor circuits mediate production of the complex
intrinsic and learned sequences of movement that are characteristic of human
motor behaviors that express cognitive goals.
5. Damage to any of these motor control circuits results in specific disruptions in
movement planning, initiation, or coordination. Damage to some of these circuits—the basal ganglia and cerebellum in particular—also causes deficits in a
variety of cognitive functions.

with special reference to vertebrates.
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 8: 233–261.
HENNEMAN, E. AND L. M. MENDELL (1981)
Functional organization of the motoneuron pool and its inputs. In Handbook
of Physiology, Section 1: The Nervous
System. Vol. 2, Part 1, V. B. Brooks (ed.).
Bethesda, MD: American Physiological
Society, pp. 423–507.
HIKOSAKA, O. (1991) Basal ganglia: Possible role in motor coordination and
learning. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 1:
635–653.
PEARSON, K. (1976) The control of walking. Sci. Am. 235 (December): 72–86.
PESARAN, B. AND J. A. MOVSHON (2008)
What to do or how to do it? Neuron 58:
301–303.
RAMNANI, N. (2006) The primate corticocerebellar system: Anatomy and function. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 7: 511–522.
WOLPERT, D. M., J. DIEDRICHSEN AND J. R.
FLANAGAN (2011) Principles of sensorimotor learning. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 12:
739–751.
WOLPERT, D. M. AND M. S. LANDY (2012)
Motor control is decision-making. Curr.
Opin. Neurobiol., in press.
YIN, H. H. AND B. J. KNOWLTON (2006)
The role of the basal ganglia in habit
formation. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 7:
565–576.

Important Original Papers
BURKE, R. E., D. N. LEVINE, M. SALCMAN
AND P. TSAIRES (1974) Motor units in
cat soleus muscle: Physiological, histochemical, and morphological characteristics. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 238: 503–514.
CHANG, S. W. C., C. PAPADIMITRIOU AND
L. H. SNYDER (2009) Using a compound
gain field to compute a reach plan.
Neuron 64: 744–755.
COSTA, M. AND S. J. H. BROOKES (1994)
The enteric nervous system. Am. J.
Gastroenterol. 89: S129–S137.
EVARTS, E. V. (1981) Functional studies of
the motor cortex. In The Organization of
the Cerebral Cortex, F. O. Schmitt, F. G.
Worden, G. Adelman and S. G. Dennis
(eds.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp.
199–236.
FETZ, E. E. AND P. D. CHENEY (1978) Muscle fields of primate corticomotoneuronal cells. J. Physiol. (Paris) 74: 239–245.
GEORGOPOLOUS, A. P., A. B. SCHWARTZ
AND R. E. KETTNER (1986) Neuronal
population coding of movement direction. Science 233: 1416–1418.
GRAZIANO, M. S., C. C. TAYLOR, T. MOORE
AND D. F. COOKE (2002) The cortical
control of movement revisited. Neuron
36: 349–362.
HENNEMAN, E., E. SOMJEN AND D. O.
CARPENTER (1965) Excitability and

MOTOR SYSTEMS: THE ORGANIZATION OF ACTION
inhibitability of motoneurons of different sizes. J. Neurophysiol. 28: 599–620.
HUNT, C. C. AND S. W. KUFFLER (1951)
Stretch receptor discharges during
muscle contraction. J. Physiol. (Lond.)
113: 298–315.
JANSEN, A. S. P., X. V. NGUYEN, V. KARPITSKIY, T. C. METTENLEITER AND A.
D. LOEWY (1995) Central command
neurons of the sympathetic nervous
system: Basis of the fight or flight
response. Science 270: 644–646.
LEE, D. L., W. H. ROHRER AND D. L.
SPARKS (1988) Population coding of
saccadic eye movements by neurons
in the superior colliculus. Nature 332:
357–360.
LIDDELL, E. G. T. AND C. S. SHERRINGTON
(1925) Recruitment and some other
factors of reflex inhibition. Proc. R. Soc.
Lond. B 97: 488–518.
PLATT, M. L. AND P. W. GLIMCHER (1999)
Neural correlates of decision variables
in parietal cortex. Nature 500: 233–235.

RESULAJ, A., R. KIANI, D. M. WOLPERT
AND M. N. SHADLEN (2009) Changes of
mind in decision-making. Nature 461:
263–266.
SELEN, L. P. J., M. N. SHADLEN AND D.
M. WOLPERT (2012) Deliberation in the
motor system: Reflex gains track evolving evidence leading to a decision.
J. Neurosci. 32: 2276–2286.
SHADLEN, M. N. AND W. T. NEWSOME
(1996) Motion perception: Seeing and
deciding. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 53:
625–633.
TANJI, J. AND K. SHIMA (1994) Role for
supplementary motor area cells in
planning several movements ahead.
Nature 371: 413–416.
WALMSLEY, B., J. A. HODGSON AND R. E.
BURKE (1978) Forces produced by medial gastrocnemius and soleus muscles
during locomotion in freely moving
cats. J. Neurophysiol. 41: 1203–1215.
WUNDERLICH, K., A. RANGEL AND J. P.
O’DOHERTY (2009) Neural computations underlying action-based decision
making in the human brain. PNAS 106:
17199–17204.

■ 165

Books
ASANUMA, H. (1989) The Motor Cortex.
New York: Raven.
BLESSING, W. W. (1997) The Lower Brainstem and Bodily Homeostasis. New York:
Oxford University Press.
BRODAL, A. (1981) Neurological Anatomy
in Relation to Clinical Medicine, 3rd Ed.
New York: Oxford University Press.
GABELLA, G. (1976) Structure of the Autonomic Nervous System. London: Chapman and Hall.
GLIMCHER, P. W. (2005) Decision, Uncertainty, and the Brain: The Science of
Neuroeconomics. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press/Bradford.
PENFIELD, W. AND T. RASMUSSEN (1950)
The Cerebral Cortex of Man: A Clinical
Study of Localization of Function. New
York: Macmillan.
PURVES, D. AND 5 OTHERS (2012) Neuroscience, 5th Ed. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer.
SHERRINGTON, C. (1947) The Integrative
Action of the Nervous System, 2nd Ed.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

