8
Memory: Varieties
and Mechanisms
INTRODUCTION
Memory allows us to learn from the past, understand the present, and
plan for the future. All cognitive abilities depend on memory to one
degree or another. Perception is the result of an interaction between
sensory stimuli and stored knowledge about the world. For example,
identifying objects depends on accessing preexisting memories about
these objects. Attention is also dependent on memory, as past experiences guide the processes of searching for and selecting relevant stimuli
in the environment. Our emotional responses are also altered by our
memories. In fact, identical stimuli can elicit very different emotional
responses in different people, depending on their life experiences. Language depends on concepts and grammatical rules stored in memory.
Decision making often requires information that must be retrieved from
memory. Finally, our sense of self and our capacity to project ourselves
into the future depends on our personal memories.
Memory is not a unitary phenomenon (see Introductory Box). Researchers distinguish between a system that maintains memories for a
few seconds or minutes (working memory) and systems that maintain
memories for longer periods. The latter include systems that mediate
conscious memories for events and facts (declarative memory) and
systems that mediate memories that are expressed through task performance (nondeclarative memory). The current chapter begins by introducing some basic concepts and reviewing evidence supporting the distinctions of working memory, declarative memory, and nondeclarative
memory. It then focuses on the neural bases of the main forms of nondeclarative memory—namely, priming, skill learning, and conditioning.
Finally, the chapter ends by describing cellular mechanisms shared by
all memory systems. Declarative memory is the focus of Chapter 9 and
working memory is considered together with other executive functions
in Chapter 13.

244 ■ CHAPTER 8

■ INTRODUCTORY BOX THE CASE OF H.M.

O

ne of the most consequential
discoveries in the history of memory research was serendipitous,
resulting from the unexpected effects of
a neurosurgical procedure performed in
1953. Patient H.M. (Henry Molaison) was
a 27-year-old man who suffered from
medically intractable epilepsy that left
him unable to work and severely debilitated. With the intent of relieving H.M.’s
frequent seizures, neurosurgeon William
Scoville removed much of the patient’s
temporal lobes on both sides, including
the amygdala, the entorhinal cortex, and
about two-thirds of the hippocampus
(Figures A–D). Prior to the surgery, H.M.
had been experiencing about 10 minor
seizures every day, with a major seizure
every few days. Consistent with the assumption that the source of the seizures
was in the medial temporal lobes, the
surgery was successful in relieving the
seizures. Unfortunately, the bilateral removal of these structures had an unforeseen consequence: the surgery left H.M.
with a devastating memory deficit.
After the original report of his memory
loss, which Scoville and neuropsychologist Brenda Milner published in 1957,
more than 100 researchers tested H.M.
using a variety of tasks, until his death
in 2008. The importance of H.M.’s case
comes from the purity of his memory
deficit, which showed the major features
of amnesia that are often present in other
cases, but seldom with the same degree
of clarity.
MRI images of H.M.’s brain. (A) The area
of H.M.’s anterior temporal lobe destroyed
by surgery is indicated by the white dotted
line. The intact posterior hippocampus is
the banana-shaped object indicated by the
white arrow. (This sagittal view shows the
right hemisphere; H.M.’s lesions were in fact
bilateral.) (B–D) Coronal sections at approximately the levels indicated by the red lines
in (A). Image (B) is the most rostral and is at
the level of the amygdala. The amygdala and
associated cortex are entirely missing. Image
(C) is at the level of the rostral hippocampus;
again, this structure and the associated cortex have been removed. Image (D) is at the
caudal level of the hippocampus; the posterior hippocampus appears intact, although
shrunken. The outlines below images (B), (C),
and (D) indicate the areas of H.M.’s brain that
were destroyed (black shading). (A–D from
Corkin et al. 1997.)

First, although H.M. was severely impaired in memory functions, he had little
or no difficulty in other cognitive domains.
His sensory and perceptual functions
were remarkably preserved. His IQ was
normal and even improved a little following surgery, perhaps because of the relief
from seizures. Moreover, he had no deficit
in executive tasks, including performance
on tasks assumed to measure frontal lobe
function (see Chapter 13).
Second, H.M.’s memory deficits generalized to all kinds of information and
to all sensory modalities. He remembered neither verbal stimuli, such as new
names and words, nor nonverbal stimuli,
such as faces and spatial layouts. He
was unable to remember postsurgery
events, regardless of whether the information to be learned or the questions
posed were presented visually, auditorily,
or in another sensory modality.

Third, although H.M.’s ability to remember new events and facts (declarative memory) was severely impaired, his
ability to retain information for brief periods of time (working memory) was intact.
For example, when asked to repeat a list
of digits (digit-span task), he was able
to repeat without error about seven to
nine digits, which is the normal range.
He also had normal working memory for
pictorial material.
Finally, and perhaps most important,
H.M.’s memory deficits were limited to
tasks that require memory of events
and facts; his problems did not affect
memories expressed through performance, such as motor or cognitive skills.
For example, when tracing geometrical
figures that could be seen only via a
mirror (mirror drawing task; Figure E),
H.M. showed daily improvements; and
these improvements persisted over time,

(A)

(B)

(C)

Damaged area
Anterior

Amygdala
Entorhinal cortex

(D)

Hippocampus
Posterior

MEMORY: VARIETIES AND MECHANISMS

■ INTRODUCTORY BOX (continued)
much as in normal subjects (Figure F), even
though he did not consciously remember
having traced geometrical figures before.
In sum, the case of H.M. made clear for
the first time the critical importance of the
medial temporal regions in certain types of
human memory, stimulating much of the
research described in this chapter and the
next.

(E)

References
CORKIN S, D. G. AMARAL, R. G. GONZALEZ, K.
A. JOHNSON AND B. T. HYMAN (1997) H.M.’s
medial temporal lobe lesion: Findings from
magnetic resonance imaging.
J. Neurosci. 17: 3964–3979.
MILNER, B., S. CORKIN AND H.-L. TEUBER (1968)
Further analysis of the hippocampal amnesic syndrome: A 14-year follow-up study of
H.M. Neuropsychologia 6: 215–234.

SCOVILLE, W. B. AND B. MILNER (1957) Loss of
recent memory after bilateral hippocampal
lesions. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiat. 20:
11–21.
SQUIRE, L. R. (2009) The legacy of patient
H.M. for neuroscience. Neuron 61: 6–9.
(E) The mirror drawing task involves tracing geometrical figures seen in a mirror. (F) H.M. shows
normal learning in this nondeclarative memory
task (errors decrease during the first session),
and this learning persists across time (errors start
at a lower level the second day). (E, F after Milner
et al. 1968.)

(F)
40
Number of errors in each attempt

SALAT, D. H. AND 6 OTHERS (2006) Neuroimaging H.M.: A 10-year follow-up examination.
Hippocampus 16: 936–945.

Day 1

Day 2

Day 3

30

20

10

0

1

10

1
10
Attempts each day

Memory Phases, Processes, Systems, and Tasks
Memory is the series of processes whereby the nervous system acquires infor-

mation from new experiences, retains this information over time, and eventually uses it to guide behavior and plan future actions. This definition points to
three basic memory phases shared by all forms of memory: encoding, storage,
and retrieval. Encoding consists of the processes whereby experiences can alter
the nervous system. These alterations, known as memory traces, are believed to
involve primarily changes in the strength and/or number of synaptic connections between neurons. Storage is the retention of memory traces over time.
Long-term retention requires cell- and system-level stabilization or consolidation processes, which are described in Chapter 9. Retrieval is the accessing of
stored memory traces, which may lead to a change in behavior and sometimes
is associated with the conscious experience of remembering.
Learning—a term closely related to memory—is used as a synonym of encoding and can also describe gradual changes in behavior as a function of training.

1

10

■ 245

246 ■ CHAPTER 8

■ BOX 8A INVESTIGATING DECLARATIVE MEMORY IN
NON-HUMAN ANIMALS

T

he most obvious challenge to
investigating declarative memory
in nonhuman animals is that they
cannot follow verbal instructions or “declare” their memories verbally. However,
there are ways of measuring declarative
memory in such circumstances.
One such method used in studies on
non-human primates is known as a delayed non-match-to-sample task (Figure
A). A typical trial in this paradigm has
three phases. During the sample phase,
a monkey is shown a single stimulus
(e.g., a brown cross) above a well containing a food reward; during the delay
phase, a door is lowered so the mon-

key can no longer see the stimulus and
reward; and during the choice phase, the
monkey is presented with the previously
rewarded stimulus (the brown cross)
along with a new stimulus (e.g., a brown
rectangle) that conceals the food reward.
This time the animal must select the new
(nonmatching) stimulus in order to obtain
the reward. Using non-match-to-sample
tasks, cognitive neuroscientists David
Gaffan and Mortimer Mishkin showed
that lesions of the medial temporal lobe

severely impair memory in monkeys,
thus providing the first animal model of
the human amnesia syndrome.
Such studies can also be done using
rodents—a particularly important advance
because the use of rodents allows us to
examine the genetic basis of behavior in
these animals. The most popular task for
measuring declarative memory in rodents
is the Morris water maze, pioneered by
neuroscientist Richard Morris and his
group. The animal’s task is to swim to a

Testing declarative memory in non-human animals. (A) The delayed non-match-to-sample task.
Declarative memory is indexed by the ability to choose the novel stimulus. (B) The Morris water
maze. Declarative memory is indexed by the ability to find the hidden platform.

(A)

Food reward

Right
Wrong

Sample phase

Delay phase

Choice phase

(B)

Start

Normal memory

Start

Impaired memory

MEMORY: VARIETIES AND MECHANISMS

■ 247

■ BOX 8A (continued)
small platform hidden just beneath the
surface in a circular tank filled with murky
water, which then provides a safe haven
(Figure B). Once the animal has learned
where to find the platform, the experimenter can assess memory by measuring
how long the rat takes to find the platform
again, or how much time it spends within
the quadrant that contains the platform
compared to the other three quadrants
of the tank. Given that the murky water

means the animal’s view of the tank is the
same in all directions, remembered cues
from objects in the room (e.g., windows,
pictures on the wall) are presumably used
to locate the platform.
The Morris water maze measures
spatial memory; however, it is also possible to measure nonspatial forms of
declarative memory in rodents in paradigms such as the odor association task
described in the text and Figure 9.4.

In this second meaning, the term learning refers to the combined effect of all
encoding, storage, and retrieval in gradually enhancing the performance of a
particular task. For this reason, the second use of learning is popular in contexts
with multiple learning trials, such as school education, skill learning, and most
of the animal memory paradigms.
In addition to memory phases and memory processes, researchers distinguish
among different memory systems. Memory systems can be defined as groups of
memory processes and associated brain regions that tend to interact to mediate
performance over a class of similar memory tasks. This last property illustrates
one of the advantages of using psychological constructs (see Chapter 1) such as
a memory system: a single construct can account for a whole set of empirical
results. The idea that memory systems mediate performance in specific memory
tasks does not, however, imply that each memory task measures a single memory
system. Although some tasks depend primarily on one memory system, most
tasks are sensitive to the contributions of more than one memory system. For this
reason, drawing inferences from memory tasks about the operation of memory
systems requires converging evidence from several different tasks. For example,
the same memory system is assumed to mediate the ability of remembering
personally experienced events regardless of whether recall is spoken or written.
The notion of memory systems has a very long history, with some basic
ideas going as far back as ancient Greece. As described in the Introductory Box,
one of the most important advances in the twentieth century was the report in
1957 of patient H.M., who suffered from amnesia. H.M.’s case showed clearly
that memories associated with consciousness depend on medial temporal lobe
regions, whereas other types of memory, those expressed through behavior,
are independent of these regions. Inspired by the case of H.M., behavioral
neuroscientists tried to produce a non-human animal model of his amnesia.
Although the role of consciousness cannot be assessed in rodents and monkeys,
researchers reasonably assumed that tasks impaired by medial temporal lobe
damage measure types of memory similar to those impaired in H.M. (Box 8A).
In parallel with this research, psychologists investigating memory in normal
human participants during the 1970s found evidence that retaining information
across delays of seconds or minutes (short-term memory) involves mechanisms that
are fundamentally different from those used for retaining information across
delays of hours, days, or weeks (long-term memory). The concept of short-term
memory, which originally was about simple maintenance of information, was
later expanded into the notion of working memory, which includes not only
simple maintenance but also operations performed on the information being
maintained and mechanisms of attention allocation.

References
D’HOOGE, R. AND P. P. DE DEYN (2001)
Applications of the Morris water maze in
the study of learning and memory. Brain
Res. Rev. 36(1): 60–90.
EICHENBAUM, H. AND N. J. COHEN (2001)
From Conditioning to Conscious Recollection:
Memory Systems of the Brain. New York:
Oxford University Press.

248 ■ CHAPTER 8
Figure 8.1 A general taxonomy
of memory systems The working
memory (or short-term memory)
system maintains information for a
few seconds; the long-term memory
system maintains information for
longer periods. Declarative (explicit)
memory is conscious memory for
events and facts; nondeclarative
(implicit) memory is memory
expressed through performance,
independently of consciousness.

Memory

Working memory

Long-term memory

Declarative (explicit)
memory

Episodic memory
(events)

Nondeclarative (implicit)
memory

Semantic memory
(facts)

Priming

Skill learning

Conditioning

These various developments led to the taxonomy of memory systems illustrated in Figure 8.1. Working memory mediates the maintenance and manipulation
of information online for a few seconds or minutes. In contrast, long-term memory
systems mediate the retention of information for longer periods (days, months,
decades). Long-term memory systems are typically divided into declarative and
nondeclarative types. Declarative memory (also known as explicit memory) refers
to conscious memory for events (episodic memory) and facts (semantic memory).
As noted already, although declarative memory was originally distinguished
by having a component of consciousness, researchers have developed tasks
that depend on similar brain regions in rodents and monkeys, and that can
be used to study declarative memory in non-human animals. Nondeclarative
memory (also known as implicit memory) refers to memories that are expressed
through performance independently of consciousness. As described later, there
are several different forms of nondeclarative memory. Before considering each
memory system (nondeclarative memory in this chapter, declarative memory in
the next chapter, and working memory in Chapter 13), it is important to review
the evidence supporting these major taxonomic distinctions.

Dissociating Memory Systems
The taxonomy in Figure 8.1 is supported by abundant evidence that the functions of different memory systems can be dissociated by examining the results
of brain lesions in human patients and animals, as well as by functional brain
imaging and electrophysiology. The next two sections provide some examples
from human patients supporting the distinctions between working memory
and declarative memory, and between declarative and nondeclarative memory.

Working memory versus declarative memory
The most telling evidence supporting the distinction between working memory
and declarative memory has been provided by cases of amnesia. This term is
typically applied to severe memory loss due to brain damage, but it may also be
used to describe our normal lack of memory for events that took place during
the first few years of life (childhood amnesia) or memory loss due to psychological trauma (psychogenic amnesia). In the case of brain damage, the memory
loss may affect information acquired after the damage (anterograde amnesia),
information acquired before the lesion (retrograde amnesia), or both.

MEMORY: VARIETIES AND MECHANISMS

■ 249

Percent correct

Number of trials required

Amnesia due to brain lesions most often arises from bilateral damage to
the medial temporal lobe. Unilateral damage of these regions usually produces
relatively mild memory deficits because the spared medial temporal lobe regions
can still support some aspects of memory. But when damage to the medial
temporal lobe is bilateral, patients may display severe anterograde amnesia
with some degree of retrograde amnesia. The retrograde amnesia typically
covers a few years prior to the lesion, as in the case of H.M., but when damage
to the medial temporal lobe is extensive, the retrograde amnesia may extend
several decades back.
Because of their anterograde amnesia, patients with bilateral damage to
the medial temporal lobe cannot form new memories for events. For example,
a patient may have a normal conversation with a new doctor, but if the doctor
leaves the room, even for a few minutes, the patient may not recognize her
when she comes back. The fact that patients with amnesia can maintain a
Figure 8.2 Evidence for different
normal conversation implies that working memory is spared, since conversing
anatomical substrates of working and
requires remembering what was said during the last few seconds or minutes.
declarative memory (A) Patient K.F.
The finding that people who suffer from amnesia because of damage to the
was impaired in immediate word recall,
medial temporal lobe are impaired in declarative memory but not in working
but he needed fewer repetitions than
memory constitutes a single dissociation. As explained in Chapter 2, however,
control subjects did to remember word
lists for longer periods of time. (B) In
single dissociations are not enough to postulate different underlying brain
ontrast, amnesia patients like H.M.
systems. The double dissociation, needed to strengthen the case, would require
tend to show intact working memory
brain-damaged patients who are impaired in working memory but not in
but impaired declarative memory.
declarative memory. Such patients have been identified, and their lesions are
(A after Warrington and Shallice 1969;
typically in the left temporoparietal cortex.
B after Drachman and Arbit 1966.)
One of the most severe cases of working memory
(A) Patient K.F.: Impaired working memory
deficit resulting from damage to the left temporopariversus preserved declarative memory
etal cortex is patient K.F. When asked, for example, to
1
Better
repeat back a list of numbers, which normal subjects
100
K.F.
3
do correctly up to a maximum of seven or eight digits,
Controls
5
K.F. could remember only two digits. Likewise, he
80
7
could rarely repeat back lists of four words, which is
9
something normal participants can virtually always
60
11
do (Figure 8.2A, left). Yet K.F.’s declarative memory
13
performance was slightly better than normal. In fact,
40
to learn longer lists he needed fewer repetitions than
15
control participants needed, and he remembered the
17
20
lists for long periods (Figure 8.2A, right). This pattern
19
Worse
is opposite the findings in patients with only medial
0
21
Working
memory
Declarative
memory
temporal lobe damage (like H.M.), who are impaired
(word span)
(learning: 10-word list)
in declarative memory but not in working memory
(Figure 8.2B).
(B) Patient H.M. (amnesic): Preserved working memory
versus impaired declarative memory

Declarative versus nondeclarative memory

25

9
8

H.M.
Controls

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Working memory
(digit span)

Longest digit sequence

10
Longest digit sequence

A key feature of medial temporal lobe amnesia is that
it impairs declarative memory, as exhibited in tests
of recall and recognition but not in nondeclarative
memory tasks such as skill learning and priming. For
example, H.M. was able to learn to trace geometrical
figures projected in a mirror (visuomotor skill) at a
normal rate, even though he could not remember the
training sessions (see Introductory Box). Conversely,
a patient referred to as M.S. showed impaired nondeclarative memory but normal declarative memory.
Like H.M., M.S. had surgery to relieve intractable epileptic seizures. However, the brain regions removed

Better

20
15
10
5
0

Worse
Declarative memory
(digit storage capacity)

250 ■ CHAPTER 8
(A)

(B) Implicit test

(C) Explicit test

100

100
New
Old

90

90
Recognition accuracy (%)

Time to identify (ms)

80
70
60
50
40
30
20

M.S.

70

60

10
50

0

Figure 8.3 Double dissociation
of declarative and nondeclarative
memory in patient M.S. (A) The
surgery performed on M.S. removed
the right occipital regions of his brain,
including the primary and much of the
secondary visual cortex (light area).
(B) In an implicit word identification
test, M.S. shows impaired priming,
whereas amnesia patients show
normal priming. (C) In an explicit
recognition test, M.S. shows normal
performance, but amnesia patients
show impaired performance. (After
Gabrieli et al. 1995.)

80

M.S.

Control

Amnesia
patients

M.S.

Control

Amnesia
patients

in his case were not the medial temporal lobes but the right occipital regions,
including the primary and much of the secondary visual cortex (Figure 8.3A).
As a result of the surgery, M.S. became blind in his left visual field. Aside from
the vision deficits, he was in good health and showed normal performance on
standardized tests of attention, memory, language, perception, and reasoning.
One study compared M.S. to a group of healthy controls and a group of
subjects with amnesia using an implicit (nondeclarative) test in which each
word was presented for increasing periods until it was identified correctly.
Half the words had been seen in a previous session, and half were presented
for the first time. As illustrated in Figure 8.3B, control subjects and amnesia
patients identified previously seen words after shorter presentations, thus
demonstrating priming. Despite good word identification performance, however,
M.S. showed no priming effect in this task. In contrast, in a declarative (explicit)
recognition test, his performance was normal, whereas amnesia patients with
medial temporal lobe damage were impaired (Figure 8.3C). Thus, M.S. was
impaired in nondeclarative but not in declarative memory, whereas patients
with amnesia showed the opposite pattern. M.S.’s priming deficits cannot be
attributed to his visual impairment, since he was blind only in the left visual
field and, as mentioned, his performance on the (visually mediated) word
identification test was normal.
Thus, both of the major distinctions in the taxonomy in Figure 8.1 are supported by clinical cases (for exceptions, see Box 8B). Whereas medial temporal
lobe damage tends to impair declarative but not working memory, left temporoparietal damage can disrupt working memory while sparing declarative
memory. In addition, medial temporal lobe damage tends to disrupt declarative
memory while sparing nondeclarative memory functions, whereas occipital
lobe damage may impair nondeclarative memory (tested with visual priming)
without altering declarative memory performance.
Finally, note that although some brain regions are differentially involved
in working memory (see Chapter 13), declarative memory (see Chapter 9), and
nondeclarative memory (see the next section), these functions involve other brain
regions that they share. For example, some frontal and parietal regions contribute
to both working and declarative memory, as well as to both declarative and

MEMORY: VARIETIES AND MECHANISMS

■ 251

■ BOX 8B MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE CONTRIBUTIONS
BEYOND DECLARATIVE MEMORY

A

lthough the basic idea that medial
temporal lobe regions are critical
for declarative memory tasks but
not for working memory and nondeclarative memory tasks fits well with most
data, there are several exceptions to this
general rule.
Regarding working memory, the
case of H.M. (see Introductory Box)
clearly showed that medial temporal lobe
regions are not necessary for maintaining simple familiar stimuli, such as
digits, for brief periods of time. However, there are a few reports of patients
with medial temporal lobe amnesia who
were impaired in complex novel stimuli
processed by working memory, such as
pictures of unfamiliar objects. In addition, single-cell recordings in monkeys
identified medial temporal neurons that
showed sustained activity during the
delay period of working memory tasks.
Moreover, fMRI studies with humans
reported medial temporal lobe activation during working memory tasks for a
variety of novel visual stimuli.
Turning to nondeclarative memory, we
find evidence supporting a role of medial
temporal lobe regions in some priming
and implicit learning tasks. Although patients with medial temporal lobe amnesia

show normal priming for single items,
such as words, some reports claim that
they can be impaired in priming for new
associations. Furthermore, the implicit
memory effect whereby repeated backgrounds enhance visual search was
found to be impaired by some forms of
medial temporal lobe damage. Likewise, implicit memory effects on eye
movements were found to be impaired
in patients with medial temporal lobe
amnesia and to elicit hippocampal activity in normal participants. Moreover, hippocampal activations were found for old
items consciously perceived as new and
for subliminally encoded items.
Two main hypotheses have been
proposed to explain medial temporal
lobe involvement in working memory and
nondeclarative memory. One idea, originally proposed by neuroscientists Howard Eichenbaum and Neal Cohen, is that
the hippocampus mediates memory for
new associations, or relational memory,
regardless of whether the memories
have to be maintained only briefly or are
processed outside of consciousness. A
related idea is that the medial temporal lobe is critical for processing flexible
memory representations—those that can
be applied in a context different from the

nondeclarative memory. Moreover, as described later in the chapter, all forms
of memory presumably depend on similar cellular and molecular mechanisms.

Nondeclarative Memory
All forms of nondeclarative memory have in common the facts that they are
expressed through performance and are independent of conscious awareness.
In other words, nondeclarative memory is evidenced by changed behavior,
even if the person is unaware that memories from specific past experience are
being accessed. Despite these shared properties, the major forms of nondeclarative memory—namely, priming, skill learning, and conditioning (see Figure
8.1)—are very different from each other. Priming is a change in the processing
of a stimulus due to a previous encounter with the same or a related stimulus,
such as completing a word fragment with a previously read word. Skill learning is a gradual improvement in performance due to repeated practice, such
as mirror drawing in the case of H.M. or riding a bicycle. Conditioning consists
of simple responses to associations between stimuli, as when a dog salivates
at the sound of a can opener associated with food. Thus, whereas priming
can result from a single encounter with a stimulus, skill learning requires repeated learning trials. Conditioning also involves multiple learning trials, but

one associated with encoding. Although
some authors believe that these two
factors are more important for defining
medial temporal, and in particular hippocampal, function than consciousness
is, most memory researchers believe
that consciousness is a major factor and
use the memory system taxonomy diagrammed in Figure 8.1.

References
CHUN, M. M. AND E. A. PHELPS (1999)
Memory deficits for implicit contextual
information in amnesic subjects with
hippocampal damage. Nat. Neurosci. 2:
844–847.
DEW, I. T. AND R. CABEZA (2011) The
porous boundaries between explicit and
implicit memory: Behavioral and neural evidence. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1224:
174–190.
HENKE, K. (2010) A model for memory
systems based on processing modes rather
than consciousness. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 11:
523–532.
RANGANATH, C. AND R. S. BLUMENFELD
(2005) Doubts about double dissociations
between short- and long-term memory.
Trends Cogn. Sci. 9: 374–380.

252 ■ CHAPTER 8
typically simpler responses and associations, than skill learning. The sections
that follow consider these phenomena in turn.

Priming

Figure 8.4 The major forms of
priming (A) This diagram shows
the hierarchy of the major types of
priming. (B) Here the primes, test
cues, and targets are compared for
perceptual, conceptual, and semantic
priming.

Priming is defined as a change in the efficacy of stimulus processing arising from
a previous encounter with the same or a related stimulus, in the absence of conscious awareness about the first encounter. In a typical paradigm, participants
attend a first session in which they read words, and a second session in which
they solve word puzzles seemingly unrelated to the words previously read. For
example, they may be asked to complete word fragments (e.g., E _ V _ L _ P _ ) with
the first words that come to mind. Priming is then measured as an increase in
the probability of completing word fragments with words presented during
the first phase (e.g., the word envelope). Critically, this facilitation effect is found
even if participants are unaware that they solved the fragments using words
previously read in the experiment. In this paradigm, priming is measured as
an increase in the probability of generating a particular stimulus, but priming
can be measured in many different ways, including increases in processing
speed and changes in eye movement patterns.
The requirement that participants be unaware that they are using information
from the first session is critical. Participants should complete E _ V _ L _ P _ with
envelope because this is the first word that comes to mind, not because they tried
to recall words from the study list. However, sometimes participants spontaneously realize that some fragments can be completed with words previously seen
in the laboratory, and they try retrieve these words to complete the fragments.
If this happens, the test is said to be contaminated by explicit memory strategies,
and its results cannot be considered a valid measure of implicit memory. Several methods have been developed to reduce the chances of explicit memory
contamination, such as using shallow or subliminal encoding conditions, or
encouraging fast test responses. Such studies may also include priming and
very similar declarative memory tests; if the two tests show different patterns
of results, it is fair to conclude that the priming task was not contaminated.
Figure 8.4 illustrates the major forms of priming. Depending on the relationship between the stimulus that generates the priming effect (the prime) and the
stimulus eliciting that effect (the target), priming can be classified as direct or
indirect. In direct priming, also called repetition priming, prime and target stimuli
are the same; in indirect priming they are different. The most typical form of
(B)
Prime

Test cue

Target

E_V_L_P_

(A)
Perceptual priming

ENVELOPE

ENVELOPE

Direct priming
STATIONERY
Conceptual priming

ENVELOPE

ENVELOPE

Semantic priming

ENVELOPE

LETTER

Priming

Indirect priming

MEMORY: VARIETIES AND MECHANISMS

indirect priming is semantic priming, in which the prime and the target are
semantically related (e.g., envelope and letter). Depending on the type of cue
used in the test, direct priming can be further classified as perceptual or
conceptual. In perceptual priming, the test cue and the target are perceptually
related, as in the aforementioned word fragment completion test. In conceptual
priming, the test cue and the target are semantically or associatively related.
For example, in the category association test, participants generate words in
response to the cue stationery, including the target word envelope.

(A)
45
Picture
Word

40
Explicit or implicit memory (%)

Perceptual priming

35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

Free recall

Fragment
completion priming

(B)
100
Semantic
Nonsemantic

90
Explicit or implicit memory (%)

Abundant evidence suggests that perceptual priming depends on brain systems different from those underlying declarative memory and, in particular, different from those underlying declarative memory for events, called
episodic memory. In the study whose results are shown in Figure 8.3, patients
with medial temporal lobe amnesia were impaired in episodic memory
(word recognition) but not in perceptual priming (faster identification of old
words). Conversely, patient M.S. with occipital lobe damage was impaired
in perceptual priming but not in episodic memory. These results suggest
that perceptual priming depends on sensory regions of the cortex, such as
visual regions of the occipital lobe.
Consistent with this conclusion, perceptual priming is reduced when the
format of the test stimuli changes between encoding and retrieval (called
study-test format shifts). For example, perceptual priming in the word
fragment completion test is markedly attenuated when items are encoded
as pictures rather than as words (e.g., presenting a drawing of an envelope
in the encoding phase rather than the word envelope). Perceptual priming is
reduced not only by study-test shifts in symbols (e.g., from pictures to words)
but also by changes in modality (e.g., from auditory to visual presentation),
and even by the introduction of more subtle changes (e.g., changing from
uppercase to lowercase letters). In general, the greater the perceptual change,
the greater the attenuation of perceptual priming. In contrast, performance
in episodic memory tests, such as free recall, is not usually disrupted by
study-test shifts in stimulus format (Figure 8.5A). This is why students readily answer questions in a written exam even if information was originally
encoded in an auditory format during a class lecture.
Whereas study-test format shifts affect perceptual priming but not episodic
memory, conceptual manipulations tend to produce the opposite effects. For
instance, episodic memory is much better for encoding tasks that promote
semantic processing (e.g., deciding whether the referent of a word is living
or nonliving) than for tasks that promote perceptual processing (e.g., deciding whether the word includes the letter a). This effect, known as levels of
processing, is the reason you think about the meaning of the information
that you are reading when studying for an exam rather than paying attention to the font the words are written in. In contrast with episodic memory,
perceptual priming is not affected by the levels-of-processing manipulation
(Figure 8.5B). Taken together with the effects of study-test format shifts (see
Figure 8.5A), this finding completes a double dissociation between perceptual
priming and episodic memory, and it strongly supports the idea that these
two forms of memory depend on different brain systems.
The case of M.S. (see Figure 8.3) and the effects of study-test format shifts
(see Figure 8.5A) suggest that perceptual priming depends on sensory cortices. Within these regions, the neural mechanism of perceptual priming is
assumed to involve a reduction in neural responses. Single-cell recording
studies in monkeys have shown that neurons in visual processing regions
show a decreased level of firing when a novel visual stimulus is repeated.

■ 253

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Corrected
recognition

Stem completion
priming

Figure 8.5 Functional dissociations
between episodic memory and
perceptual priming (A) Verbal free recall
is as good for items studied as words as
it is for items studied as pictures, whereas
word fragment completion priming is
much greater for items studied as words
than it is for items studied as pictures.
(B) Recognition is better for words encoded under semantic than under nonsemantic study conditions, whereas stem
completion priming is similar across these
conditions. (A after Weldon and Roediger
1987; B after Graf and Mandler 1984.)

254 ■ CHAPTER 8
(A)
Study

Test

Same

Different

Novel

(B)

Left fusiform

0.5

Right fusiform
Novel
Same
Different

Signal change (%)

Figure 8.6 Repetition suppression
(A) In this fMRI study of priming, study
and test stimuli were the same object
or different exemplars of the same
object category. (B) The left fusiform
cortex showed significant repetition
suppression in both the same and the
different conditions, whereas the right
fusiform cortex showed it only in the
same condition. (After Koutstaal et al.
2001.)

0

0

16
Time (s)

Novel
Same
Different

0

16
Time (s)

The term repetition suppression has been used to describe a similar and presumably related phenomenon observed in functional neuroimaging studies in
which previously encountered (primed) stimuli result in weaker hemodynamic
responses.
For example, one study found that, compared to novel objects, objects
repeated in the identical format elicited reduced activity in bilateral fusiform
regions (Figure 8.6). Interestingly, right and left fusiform regions differed in
their sensitivity to study-test format shifts: presenting different versions of the
same objects eliminated the repetition suppression effect in the right fusiform
gyrus but not in the in the left fusiform gyrus. These results have been interpreted as evidence that, compared to the right fusiform gyrus, the left fusiform
gyrus stores more abstract object representations, which can support priming
across some degree of physical change. However, both left and right fusiform
regions, like occipitotemporal areas, are concerned primarily with perceptual
representations (visual), rather than with the semantic representations that
mediate conceptual priming.
Several theories have been postulated to explain why reduced neural activity (repetition suppression or neural priming) leads to enhanced processing of
a stimulus (behavioral priming). According to one view, known as sharpening
theory, when a stimulus is repeated, neurons that carry critical information
about the stimulus continue to fire vigorously, whereas neurons that are not
essential for processing the stimulus respond less and less, leading to reduced
hemodynamic responses (Figure 8.7). The dropping out of noncritical neurons
is assumed to yield a cortical representation that is both more sparse (fewer

MEMORY: VARIETIES AND MECHANISMS
Neurons

PET/fMRI

Sharpened
representation

Reduced
hemodynamic
response

Figure 8.7 Sharpening theory When a stimulus is repeated,
neurons that are not essential for processing the stimulus
respond less and less, leading to reduced hemodynamic
responses. The sharpened representation is smaller (fewer
neurons) and more selective (only critical neurons). (After
Henson and Rugg 2003.)

Repetitions

Stimulus

■ 255

neurons) and more selective (only critical neurons). This sharpened representation could explain behavioral priming effects.

Conceptual priming
Just as perceptual priming reflects prior processing of the perceptual aspects
of a stimulus, conceptual priming reflects prior processing of its conceptual
aspects. Unlike perceptual priming—but similar to episodic memory—conceptual priming is sensitive to conceptual manipulations but not to perceptual
manipulations. Conceptual priming, however, is different from declarative
memory. Like perceptual priming—and unlike declarative memory—conceptual
priming does not depend on conscious awareness, and it is preserved in amnesia patients with medial temporal lobe damage. Memory performance in these
patients is impaired in both perceptual and conceptual memory tests when the
tests are explicit, but performance is normal when the tests are implicit. Thus,
despite their functional differences, both perceptual and conceptual priming
operate independently of the medial temporal lobes.
Given their contrasting properties, perceptual and conceptual priming
are likely to depend on different brain regions. Some evidence supporting
this idea was provided by research on patients with Alzheimer’s disease, who
show neural deterioration not only in medial temporal lobe regions but also
in lateral temporal and prefrontal cortices. Like patients with amnesia, most
patients with Alzheimer’s disease are impaired in declarative memory but not
in visual perceptual priming. These deficits are consistent with the medial
temporal lobe deterioration and relative sparing of the visual cortices. Unlike
amnesia patients, however, Alzheimer’s patients are impaired in conceptual
priming. This deficit suggests that conceptual priming is mediated by brain
regions affected in Alzheimer’s but not in amnesia, such as lateral temporal
and prefrontal cortices.

256 ■ CHAPTER 8
Novel > Repeated
Novel
Repeated
fMRI activity

Figure 8.8 Conceptual priming and
the left inferior frontal gyrus The left
inferior frontal gyrus showed repetition
suppression when the same semantic
task was performed during encoding
and retrieval (within-task condition)
but not when the encoding task was
nonsemantic (across-task condition).
(After Wagner et al. 2000.)

Anterior

Within-task

Across-task

Type of priming

The role of these regions in conceptual priming has been confirmed by
functional neuroimaging studies. Within the prefrontal cortex, conceptual
priming has been linked to the anterior portion of the left inferior frontal gyrus,
an area strongly associated with semantic processing (see Chapter 12). In one
fMRI study, for example, participants classified words as either abstract (e.g.,
honesty) or concrete (e.g., table) in one task, or as either uppercase or lowercase in
a second task. They subsequently repeated the abstract/concrete classification
task, which this time included words encountered during the previous abstract/
concrete task (within-task condition), words encountered during the previous
uppercase/lowercase task (across-task condition), and novel words. Compared to
novel words, the anterior left inferior frontal gyrus showed repetition suppression in the within-task condition but not in the across-task condition (Figure
8.8). This dissociation supports the assumption that the repetition suppression
effect in this region reflects the reinstatement of conceptual processes associated
with the abstract/concrete task, rather than the recapitulation of perceptual
processes associated with just seeing the same words again.

Semantic priming

Ache

Patient

Dentist

Clinic

Doctor
Tooth
Surgeon

Hospital

High

In both perceptual and conceptual priming, the prime
and target stimuli have the same name (e.g., envelope
in the example in Figure 8.4). In semantic priming,
however, the prime and target have different names
but are semantically related. In a typical semanticpriming paradigm, participants make simple decisions
about each word in a sequence, and response times
are faster for words (e.g., nurse) that were preceded by
semantically related word (e.g., doctor) than for words
preceded by semantically unrelated words (e.g., shoe).
One theoretical account of semantic priming is
based on the assumption that semantic memory is
organized as a network in which each node corresponds to a concept and each link corresponds to
an association between two concepts (Figure 8.9).
When a node is accessed it becomes activated, or so
the argument goes, and activation spreads through

Nurse
Low
Association
strength

Node
activation

Figure 8.9 Portion of a semantic memory network In
this example, activation spreads from the node doctor to
associated nodes (e.g., nurse).

MEMORY: VARIETIES AND MECHANISMS
(A)

Related

Unrelated

Shed

Book

(B)

Time

Barn

Fish

Unrelated
> Related

Figure 8.10 Location of neural activation related to semantic priming (A) This
functional neuroimaging study of semantic priming compared sequentially presented
word pairs that were semantically either related or unrelated. (B) The left anterior
temporal cortex showed less activity in the related than in the unrelated condition,
thereby linking this region to semantic priming. (After Rossell et al. 2003.)

the network according to the strength of the associations between neurons
encoding the concepts. The concept of spreading activation has been used to
rationalize many semantic memory phenomena, including semantic priming.
For example, activation from the node doctor spreads to the node nurse, so if the
word nurse is presented before the activation for doctor dissipates, this word is
processed faster.
In this view, the neural mechanisms of semantic priming should involve
brain regions associated with the storage of semantic knowledge, such as left
anterior temporal cortical regions. Functional MRI evidence is consistent with
this prediction. For example, one study found that when participants were presented with pairs of words, either related or unrelated (Figure 8.10A), the only
region that showed less activity in the related than in the unrelated condition
was the left anterior temporal cortex (Figure 8.10B).
The purpose of semantic priming is presumably to facilitate cognitive tasks
in everyday life, such as reading with comprehension (see Chapter 12) and
problem solving. For example, semantic priming may automatically activate
related but not consciously considered ideas when solving a problem, the ideas
seeming to simply “pop into our heads” to give an unexpected solution.

Repetition enhancement
Although priming (perceptual, conceptual, or semantic) is usually associated
with a reduction in activity (repetition suppression), in some conditions it can
be associated with the opposite effect: an increase in activity called repetition
enhancement. According to one theory, whether priming is associated with repetition suppression or enhancement depends on whether the stimuli employed
have preexisting memory representations.
Like any form of memory, priming requires a memory trace, which can be
defined as an enduring change in the nervous system that stores informational
content (as described earlier). For stimuli that have preexisting representations,
such as familiar faces, priming could reflect a modification of stored representations.
But for stimuli without preexisting representations, priming might require the
creation of new representations. It has been suggested that the former mechanism
leads to repetition suppression, whereas the latter leads to enhancement. Support
for this theory is not strong, but one fMRI study found a clear dissociation using
faces: priming of familiar faces was associated with repetition suppression in
the right fusiform gyrus, whereas priming of unfamiliar faces was associated
with repetition enhancement (Figure 8.11). The repetition suppression effect
would reflect access to a sharper representation, whereas repetition enhancement

■ 257

258 ■ CHAPTER 8
(A)

Familiar 1

Unfamiliar 1

(B)

(Target)

Repetition suppression

1.5

Familiar 2

Repetition enhancement
1.5

Familiar 1
Familiar 2

Unfamiliar 1
Unfamiliar 2
1.0
Signal change (%)

1.0
Signal change (%)

Figure 8.11 Priming-related
decreases and increases in
brain activity (A) Familiar and
unfamiliar faces were presented
twice in this paradigm. (B) The
right fusiform gyrus showed
repetition suppression (familiar 2
< familiar 1) for the familiar stimuli,
but repetition enhancement for the
unfamiliar stimuli (unfamiliar 2 >
unfamiliar 1). (After Henson et al.
2000.)

0.5

0

–0.5

0.5

0

0

5

15
10
Time (s)

20

25

–0.5

0

5

15
10
Time (s)

20

25

could reflect the retrieval of a new memory representation. The latter idea fits
with the fact that episodic retrieval, which is generally assumed to involve the
recovery of new memory traces, is associated with increases in brain activity.
In summary, all three priming subtypes (perceptual, conceptual, and semantic)
are independent of conscious awareness or the integrity of the medial temporal
lobes, depending primarily on different processing in neocortical regions. In
functional neuroimaging studies, primed stimuli have been associated with
a reduction in neuronal activity known as repetition suppression. Perceptual
priming is often associated with repetition suppression in sensory cortex;
conceptual priming, with suppression in the anterior left inferior prefrontal
cortex; and semantic priming, with suppression in the left anterior temporal
cortex. Whereas repetition suppression fits with the idea of modification in a
preexisting representation, priming for novel stimuli sometimes yields repetition
enhancement, which may reflect the creation of new representations.

Skill Learning
Unlike priming, which can result from a single exposure to a stimulus, skill learning refers to gradual changes in behavior due to extensive practice. Skill learning
includes learning to play a musical instrument, to ride a bicycle, to throw a baseball, to type on a keyboard, and innumerable other abilities we learn during our
lifetimes. Like priming, skill learning is independent of the medial temporal lobes

■ 259

MEMORY: VARIETIES AND MECHANISMS

and is preserved in patients with amnesia. Whereas priming depends mainly
on the neocortex, skill learning appears to depend more heavily on the interaction between the neocortex and subcortical structures such as the basal ganglia.
Complex skills require fast and accurate responses, efficient processing of
sensory stimuli, and the abstraction of stimulus-response patterns. In most
real-world skills, these motor, perceptual, and cognitive operations are closely
intertwined. For example, playing the piano requires rapid and precise hand
and finger movements (motor operations) coordinated with quick processing of
the score, the keyboard, and the generated sounds (perceptual operations), with
the aim of fulfilling very specific musical goals (cognitive operations). Although
motor, perceptual, and cognitive processing progress concurrently, some tasks
emphasize one type of operation more than the others. The following sections
consider the neural correlates and testing methods of skill learning for tasks
that underscore the relevant motor, perceptual, or cognitive operations.

Motor skill learning
We learn innumerable motor skills during life. As babies, we learn to sit, stand,
crawl, and walk. As toddlers, we learn to climb stairs, kick a ball, and ride a tricycle. As preschoolers, we learn to hop on one foot, and to bounce, throw, and
catch a ball. As school-age children, we learn to skip rope, ride a bicycle, swim,
scale fences, use tools, and play a variety of sports. Many children also learn to
play a musical instrument. Motor skill learning never ends. As adults, we keep
learning new motor skills (e.g., thumb typing on a mobile phone); and as we grow
old, we learn to adjust preexisting motor skills to a weaker body. Although a goal
of neuroscientists is to understand the neural bases of these various real-world
skills, as in other fields the challenge must be made manageable by investigating relatively simple motor learning tasks. These tasks can be roughly divided
into two categories: motor sequence learning tasks, which focus on the incremental
acquisition of movements into a well-executed behavior; and motor adaptation
tasks, which focus on the process of compensating for environmental changes.
The most thoroughly studied motor sequence learning task is the serial reaction
time (SRT) task. A typical version of this task involves four screen locations and
four spatially mapped response keys (Figure 8.12A). On each trial, a stimulus
appears in one of the locations and the participant presses the corresponding
key. Unbeknownst to the subjects, the order of the stimulus location follows a
repeated sequence, typically one that is 10 to 12 units
long. The results of such tests show that even when
(B)
participants are unaware that there is a sequence, the
420
sequence repetition leads to faster reaction times as the

Figure 8.12 Serial reaction time
(SRT) task (A) In SRT paradigms,
participants press keys corresponding to the locations in which stimuli
are presented. (B) When the order
of locations follows a repeated
sequence, response times become
shorter and shorter, even if participants are unaware of the sequence
patterns. This improvement in
performance reflects implicit learning
of the sequence. R, random; S,
sequence.

400

(A)
Response time (ms)

380
360
340
320
300
280
260

0

R

S

S

S

S

R

S

1

2

3

4
Trial block

5

6

7

8

260 ■ CHAPTER 8
task progresses. Such implicit learning of sequence can be detected by interposing a block of trials in which the order of the stimulus locations is completely
random (e.g., trial block 6 in Figure 8.12B); note that reaction times during this
block are significantly slower than in neighboring blocks (e.g., trial blocks 5 and 7).
Motor sequence learning tasks such as SRT tasks are preserved in amnesia
patients with medial temporal lobe damage but are impaired in patients with basal
ganglia disorders, such as the neural degeneration that occurs in Parkinson’s or
Huntington’s diseases (see Chapter 5). Consistent with this evidence, functional
neuroimaging of implicit learning in normal subjects shows activation in the
basal ganglia. As explained in Chapter 5, the basal ganglia modulate motor and
premotor cortices by controlling the starting and stopping of movements. The
cerebellum exerts an additional modulatory influence by coordinating movements and correcting errors. Finally, the posterior parietal cortex is involved
in processing spatial coordinates for guiding movement (parietal damage may
produce optic ataxia, a deficit in reaching and saccade accuracy). Thus, it is not
surprising that all these regions play an important role in motor skill learning
and are frequently activated in functional neuroimaging studies.
Researchers often distinguish two phases of motor sequence learning: an
early learning phase, when performance improves rapidly within a single training
session; and an advanced learning phase, when performance improves slowly over
multiple practice sessions. The duration of these learning phases depends on the
complexity of the task. For example, the early phase may last just a few minutes
for a simple four-keystroke sequence, but months for a complex piano piece.
Different brain regions are evidently involved in early and advanced learning
phases. For example, one study found that during the early learning phase (day
1), motor sequence learning activated the aforementioned motor skill learning
network, including motor cortical regions (premotor cortex, pre-supplementary
motor area, and supplementary motor area), the basal ganglia (caudate), the
cerebellum, and the parietal cortex (Figure 8.13A). The advanced learning phase
(day 5) was associated with reduced global activity in most of these regions
(Figure 8.13B), possibly reflecting reduced demands for error correction, as well
as increased activity in specific subregions of the primary motor cortex and the
cerebellum. These increases in activity were correlated with the synchrony of
motor responses, confirming their contribution to advanced learning. There is
(B)

(A)

–3.17

3.17

13

Figure 8.13 Regions associated with early learning of a motor sequence In this
study, participants produced a precisely timed sequence of finger taps in synchrony
with visual stimuli. The sequence was a complex arrangement of long and short
elements in the learn condition, but always long elements followed by short in the
baseline condition. (A) Compared to baseline, the learn condition activated motor
cortical regions (premotor cortex, pre-supplementary motor area, and supplementary
motor area), the basal ganglia (caudate), the cerebellum, and the parietal cortex
during the first session (day 1). (B) Reduced activity during advanced learning (day
5 compared to day 1) was found in primary motor cortex, primary somatosensory
cortex, premotor cortex, and the cerebellum.(From Steele and Penhune 2010.)

–7.5

MEMORY: VARIETIES AND MECHANISMS
(A)

(B)

TMS on
parietal cortex
(experimental)

Familiarization
in null field
Target

Force field
Air sled
Initial
performance
in force field

Final
performance
in force field

Figure 8.14 Testing motor learning and its basis in paradigms that alter sensorymotor relationships (A) This method of investigating motor learning measures
how people learn to adapt their movements to compensate for a force field applied
to a handle. (B) TMS interference of the posterior parietal cortex disrupts motor
adaptation. (After Della-Maggiore et al. 2004.)

also evidence that the transition from early to advanced phases involves a shift
from associative to motor-related regions of the basal ganglia and cerebellum.
Turning to motor adaptation tasks, investigators measure adaptation to
externally induced sensory or motor perturbations. In an example of sensory
perturbation, subjects wear prism spectacles that systematically shift the visual
image either horizontally or vertically. In an example of motor perturbation,
torque motors are used to create a force field that disturbs the normal movement of a handle (Figure 8.14A). After such manipulations, tracking is initially
inaccurate, but it improves rapidly with practice. Functional neuroimaging
studies have associated adaptation to novel sensory-motor relationships with
activations in the posterior parietal cortex. The causal role of these activations
has been confirmed using transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS). For example,
one TMS study found that disrupting parietal function precluded complete
adaptation (arm trajectories were never completely straight; Figure 8.14B, left).
In contrast, TMS of a control region (occipital cortex) did not produce the same
effect (Figure 8.14B, right).

Perceptual skill learning
Perceptual skill learning refers to improvements in processing perceptual stimuli
that are identical or similar to stimuli that have been repeatedly encountered.
Perceptual skill learning is essential in everyday life. For example, this type of
skill learning underlies our ability to understand spoken and written language.

■ 261

TMS on
occipital cortex
(control)

262 ■ CHAPTER 8
Language comprehension based solely on declarative memory is slow and
laborious, as anybody who has tried to learn a foreign language can confirm.
However, perceptual skill learning eventually enables us to understand strings
of words effortlessly, without the need to consciously retrieve the meanings of
individual words or the rules of grammar when we converse.
In language processing, the neural correlates of perceptual skill learning
include all the brain regions involved in language comprehension regions, which
are reviewed in Chapter 12. Perceptual skill learning plays an equally critical
role in processing music (see Chapter 4), and there is some evidence that trained
musicians can co-opt language brain regions for the symbolic learning aspects
of this task. Perceptual skill learning in the visual domain plays an obvious
role in many other circumstances where improved perceptual performance is
valued. Radiologists, for example, gradually learn to identify subtle differences in
X-ray, CT, MRI, and other medical images. In fact, perceptual learning has been
identified as a major factor accounting for better cancer detection accuracy in
experienced mammographers compared to less experienced medical residents.
Perceptual skill learning can be studied in the laboratory using simple sensory discrimination tasks. A popular test of this sort is the mirror reading task, in
which subjects learn to read geometrically altered text (consider also the mirror
drawing task discussed earlier). Like many other skill learning tasks, mirror
reading is learned normally in patients with medial temporal lobe damage, but
impaired in conditions that affect the basal ganglia (see Chapter 5). Functional
neuroimaging studies show that, compared to normal reading, mirror reading
(A)

Mean signal change (%)

(C) Center of right FFA
2.0

1.5

Bird experts
Car experts

1.0

0.5

0

–0.5

Misc.
objects

Cars

Birds

Faces

(B)

Subject 1

Faces

Subject 2

Figure 8.15 Perceptual skill learning
(A) Examples of meaningless threedimensional objects known as
Greebles. (B) Expertise in classifying
and identify-ing Greebles is associated
with increased activity in the fusiform
face area (FFA; boxed areas), suggesting that the FFA is not specific to
faces. (C) In car experts, the FFA is
more strongly activated by pictures
of cars than of birds, whereas in bird
experts the opposite pattern is seen.
(A courtesy of Isabel Gauthier; B from
Gauthier et al. 1999; C after Gauthier
et al. 2000.)

Greeble novices
Greebles

Greeble experts
Faces
Greebles

MEMORY: VARIETIES AND MECHANISMS

elicits activation in occipitotemporal and parietal regions (i.e., in both ventral
and dorsal pathways), as well as in the basal ganglia.
Another way to examine perceptual skill learning is to train participants to
recognize relatively meaningless three-dimensional objects known as “Greebles”
(Figure 8.15A). Cognitive neuroscientists Isabelle Gauthier, Michael Tarr, and
collaborators found that expertise in classifying and identifying Greebles is
associated with increased activity in the right fusiform region known as the
fusiform face area, or FFA (Figure 8.15B; see also Chapter 3). This observation
suggests that, rather than being a face-specific module, the function of the FFA
is related to visual expertise. Greebles may activate the FFA because they have
some features that resemble faces. However, the FFA of car experts is also more
readily activated by pictures of cars than of birds, whereas in bird experts this
region is more readily activated by pictures of birds than of cars (Figure 8.15C).
Although motor and perceptual skill learning are described separately
in most accounts, acquiring skills typically involves both forms of learning.
Moreover, skill learning often involves a shift from perceptual to motor processes. For example, someone learning to drive devotes much visual attention
to relevant visual cues and the appropriate motor responses (think of the challenge involved in learning to parallel park). Eventually these stimuli become
automatically linked to appropriate motor responses and no longer require
conscious mediation. One fMRI study of this shift in perceptual-to-motor
learning used a simple task in which participants decided whether a pair of
geometrical figures matched. The attentional demands for analyzing feature
differences in this task are initially high, but as memory templates for each
figure pair are created, visual attention decreases and the role of automatic,
learned motor associations increases. Consistent with this result, learning
this task is accompanied by a shift from activation in a region associated with
visual attention (the intraparietal sulcus; Figure 8.16A) to regions associated
with motor processing (the postcentral gyrus; Figure 8.16B).

Cognitive skill learning
Cognitive skill learning refers to problem-solving tasks in which subjects are required to use various cognitive skills to solve a task. An example of this sort of
task is probabilistic classification learning, in which participants learn to classify
stimuli on the basis of statistical information. In a paradigm called the weather
prediction task, in each trial participants look at four cards with geometrical shapes
that are associated with future weather conditions (Figure 8.17A). Using the

(B)

(A)

Figure 8.16 Shift of activity from
attention to motor-related brain areas
during visual learning (A) In each trial,
participants decided whether a pair of
geometrical figures matched. During
early learning, attentional demands for
analyzing feature differences elicited
greater activity in the intraparietal
sulcus, but this activity decreased
across sessions (session 1 > sessions
3 and 5). (B) As participants learned to
associate each figure pair with a motor
response, activity increased in hand
areas in motor and sensory cortices
(session 5 > sessions 1 and 3). Arrows
indicate activations from which the
data in the graphs were extracted.
(After Pollmann and Maertens 2005.)
Postcentral gyrus

Intraparietal sulcus
First session
Third session
Fifth session

Signal change (%)

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
–0.1
–0.2
Decrease across sessions
Increase across sessions

0.5

First session
Third session
Fifth session

0.4
Signal change (%)

0.5

■ 263

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
–0.1

0

2

4

6 8 10
Time (s)

12

14

–0.2

0

2

4

6 8 10
Time (s)

12

14

264 ■ CHAPTER 8
(A)
In this learning game, you are the
weather forecaster. You will learn
how to predict rain or shine using a
deck of four cards:

Examples of probabilistic relations:

Predicts rain 80% of the time

Predicts rain 40% of the time

(C)

(B)

9
Control
Amnesia patients
Parkinson’s patients

70

8
Correct predictions (%)

Correct predictions (%)

75

65
60
55

7
6
5
4
3
2
1

50

10

20

30
Trials

Figure 8.17 Probabilistic
classification learning in patients with
Parkinson’s disease or amnesia
(A) The weather prediction task.
(B) Subjects with amnesia (medial
temporal lobe damage) are slow to
learn but eventually reach the same
level of performance as controls do; in
contrast, the performance of patients
with Parkinson’s (basal ganglia
deficits) never improves. (C) In sharp
contrast with probabilistic learning
performance, in an episodic memory
task (declarative memory) amnesia
patients are markedly impaired,
whereas Parkinson’s patients perform
as well as controls. Taken together, the
results indicate that the basal ganglia
are critical for implicit skill learning but
not for episodic memory, whereas the
medial temporal lobes are critical for
episodic memory but not for implicit
skill learning. (After Knowlton et al.
1996.)

40

50

0

Controls

Amnesia
patients

Parkinson’s
patients

cards, the subjects must “forecast” what they think the weather will be. After
each decision they are informed whether the prediction was correct. The critical
feature of the task is that each of the cards is only probabilistically related to the
two possible weather outcomes (e.g., a certain card may be associated with rain
only 70 percent of the time); thus, an explicit rule is difficult to infer. Nevertheless, the participants implicitly learn to use the probabilistic information (i.e.,
they come to associate certain card combinations with an increased probability
of rain), and over many trials the accuracy of their predictions slowly improves.
One study found a significant difference in performance in the weather prediction task between amnesia patients who had medial temporal lobe damage,
and Parkinson’s patients, who had impaired basal ganglia function. Although
patients with amnesia improved somewhat more slowly than controls, they
eventually learned the task as well as controls did. In contrast, patients with
Parkinson’s disease never learned the task (Figure 8.17B). When these groups
of patients were tested in an episodic memory test, the opposite result was
found: patients with amnesia were impaired compared to controls, whereas
patients with Parkinson’s were not (Figure 8.17C). Thus, damage of the basal
ganglia in Parkinson’s patients impaired skill learning but not declarative
memory, whereas damage of the medial temporal lobes in amnesia patients
impaired declarative memory but not skill learning. These observations are
consistent with the idea that episodic memory, as noted earlier, depends on
medial temporal lobe structures, whereas cognitive skill learning depends at
least to some degree on the integrity of the basal ganglia.
This conclusion about cognitive skill learning is further supported by
functional neuroimaging evidence. In one study, normal participants were
scanned while they carried out a simplified version of the weather prediction

MEMORY: VARIETIES AND MECHANISMS

■ 265

task (Figure 8.18A). Consistent with patient studies, the medial temporal lobe
was more activated in the paired-association task than in the weather prediction
task, whereas the basal ganglia showed the opposite pattern (Figure 8.18B).
Early trials in this task presumably have a significant episodic memory component that reflects explicit learning of the symbol cards needed to make the
(B)

(A)

Medial temporal lobe

Weather prediction (WP) task
Rain?

Striatum

Sunshine
WP>PA

Subject presses button
for rain or sunshine.
Paired-associate (PA) task
Sunshine

Sunshine

PA>WP

Subject presses button to
denote stimulus onset.

(D)
Medial temporal lobe
activity (relative signal change)

(C)

0.8
Medial temporal
lobes

0.4

Relative magnetic resonance signal

0
–0.4

40

30

Eac
per h tria 20
isti l:
10
mu
lus
tim
e (s
)

0

100

200

300

on:

sessi
scan
e
l
o
Wh ime (s)
t
scan

0
–0.2
–0.4
–0.6

40
30
Eac
20
per h tria
10
isti l:
mu
lus
tim
e (s
)

0

100

200

300

Weather prediction
Paired associate

0
–0.1
–0.2
–0.3
–0.4

500

400

Caudate

0.2

0.1

500

400
n:

sio
n ses
le sca s)
o
h
(
W
time
scan

–0.2 –0.1
0
0.1 0.2
0.3 0.4
0.5
Caudate activity (relative signal change)

Figure 8.18 Functional MRI study comparing cognitive
skill learning and episodic memory encoding in normal
subjects (A) Participants performed two tasks in the
scanner: a two-card version of the weather prediction (WP)
task, and intentional learning of associations between pairs
of cards and the words rain or sunshine (paired-associate
[PA] task). (B) Consistent with patient data (see Figure 8.17),
medial temporal lobe regions were more activated in the
paired-associate task (episodic memory) than in the weather
prediction task (cognitive skill learning), whereas the basal
ganglia showed the opposite pattern. (C) Analyses of activity
across weather prediction trials (scan time in the graphs)
indicated that medial temporal lobe regions were initially
active (first 100 trials), possibly reflecting explicit learning of
the cards, but were later deactivated. In contrast, the caudate
was originally deactivated and then became activated as
implicit learning increased over trials. These results suggest
an opposing relationship between the medial temporal
lobes and the basal ganglia. (D) Consistent with this idea, a
negative correlation was found between medial temporal and
caudate activations. (After Poldrack et al. 2001.)

266 ■ CHAPTER 8
prediction. This interpretation would also explain why patients with amnesia
are a bit slower than controls in learning the weather prediction task. Consistent
with this idea, the medial temporal lobes are activated during initial trials, but
deactivated during most of the learning phase; the basal ganglia (caudate) show
the opposite temporal pattern (Figure 8.18C,D). These contrasting temporal
patterns suggest an opposing relationship between the medial temporal lobes
and the basal ganglia. One possible explanation is a competition between the
need for accessible knowledge (medial temporal lobes) versus the need to learn
fast, automatic responses in specific situations (basal ganglia).
In sum, there is abundant evidence that skill learning depends on the integrity
of the basal ganglia. Patients with basal ganglia disorders, such as Parkinson’s
and Huntington’s diseases, are impaired in motor skill learning tasks, such as
the serial reaction time task; in perceptual skill learning tasks, such as mirror
reading; and in cognitive skill learning tasks, such as probabilistic classification.
In addition to the basal ganglia, however, skill learning involves other brain
regions that vary depending on the task. Motor skill learning has been associated with activation of the posterior parietal cortex, supplementary motor area,
cingulate cortex, and cerebellum. Perceptual skill learning involves the activation
of visual cortices when the learned skills are visually based. Finally, complex
cognitive skill learning involves medial temporal regions initially, when the
explicit components and rules of the task are being acquired; but these regions
are not necessary for subsequent learning of implicit rules, as demonstrated
by preserved probabilistic classification learning in amnesia patients. Implicit
cognitive learning, like other learned skills, depends on the basal ganglia and
the regions of neocortex relevant to the particular cognitive domain.

Conditioning
In addition to priming and skill learning, nondeclarative memory systems include
conditioning. Conditioning has been intensively studied over the past century,
from both psychological and neurobiological perspectives, and can be defined
as the generation of a response that is elicited by pairing a neutral stimulus
with an appetitive or aversive stimulus that normally elicits the response being studied. There are two broad forms of conditioning: classical and operant.
In classical conditioning, an innate reflex is modified by associating its normal
triggering stimulus with an unrelated stimulus that reliably predicts the trigger;
the unrelated stimulus eventually will trigger the original response by virtue of
this association. This type of conditioning was famously demonstrated by the
Russian psychologist Ivan Pavlov’s experiments with dogs, carried out early in
the twentieth century. The dogs’ innate reflex was salivation (the unconditioned
response, or UR) in response to the sight and/or smell of food (the unconditioned
stimulus, US). The association was elicited in the animals by repeatedly pairing
the sight/smell of food with the sound of a bell (the conditioned stimulus, CS).
Such conditioning, also called the conditioned reflex, was considered established
when the CS (the sound of the bell) by itself elicited salivation (the conditioned
response, CR), even without the presentation of food.
In operant conditioning, also known as instrumental learning, the probability
of a behavioral response is altered by associating the response with a reward
(or in some instances a punishment). In psychologist Edward Thorndike’s
original experiments, carried out in the 1890s, cats learned to escape from a
puzzle box by pressing the lever that opened a trap door to get a food reward.
Although the cats initially pressed the lever only occasionally—and more
or less by chance—the probability of their doing so increased sharply as the
animals associated this action with escape and reward. In B. F. Skinner’s far
more complete and better-known experiments performed a few decades later,

MEMORY: VARIETIES AND MECHANISMS

■ 267

pigeons or rats learned to associate pressing a lever with receiving a food pellet
in a widely used device that came to be known as a Skinner box (see Chapter 1).
In both classical and operant conditioning, it usually takes a number of
CS-US training trials for the conditioning to become established—a process
called acquisition. Furthermore, if the conditioned animal performs the critical
response but the US is no longer provided, the conditioned response gradually disappears—a phenomenon called extinction. Although the conditioned
response is no longer expressed following extinction training, the memory
of the CS-US association is stored in the cortex and can be reexpressed upon
appropriate retrieval cues (e.g., if the US is reintroduced or the animal reenters
the environment in which the conditioned association was initially learned).
Such reemergence of conditioned behaviors plagues the clinical treatment of
anxiety and addiction, which are believed to be supported in part by conditioning processes, despite the modest success of extinction-based (exposure)
therapies. In considering the neural basis of classical conditioning, the paradigms
are emotionally neutral. The neural correlates of emotional conditioning are
considered with other forms of emotional learning in Chapter 10.
In classical conditioning, it is important to distinguish between delay and
trace conditioning. Figure 8.19 illustrates the difference between these two
variants of classical conditioning using eyeblink conditioning as an example. In
this paradigm a puff of air, which elicits a reflexive (automatic) blink, is repeatedly paired with a tone until the tone by itself elicits blinking. The blink reflex
is adaptive to the animal in that it causes the membrane protecting the eye
to close, shielding the eye from potential toxins or hazards blown in through
Figure 8.19 Two classical
the airstream. In order for this reflex to be effective, the membrane must close
conditioning variants illustrated using
quickly and precisely. In both delay and trace conditioning, the tone (the conan eyeblink paradigm (A) In delay
conditioning, the conditioned stimulus
ditioned stimulus) starts before the air puff (the unconditioned stimulus). The
(CS) starts before the unconditioned
difference is that in delay conditioning, the CS is still present when the US starts,
stimulus (US) but is ongoing when the
and the two terminate at the same time (Figure 8.19A); in trace conditioning,
US starts. (B) In trace conditioning,
however, there is a brief time interval between the end of the CS and the start
the CS ends before the US starts,
of the US (Figure 8.19B). Thus, in trace conditioning
leaving a time interval between the
two stimuli.
the CS must leave some kind of memory trace in the
(A) Delay conditioning
nervous system in order for a CS-US association to
be established, whereas this is not the case in delay
Conditioned stimulus
conditioning. Although the difference between delay
(tone)
and trace conditioning may seem trivial, these different forms of classical conditioning are now known to
have different neural correlates.
Eyeblink delay conditioning depends primarily on
the cerebellum. For example, patients with cerebellar
damage due to different causes (alcohol abuse, dissemiUnconditioned stimulus
nated demyelination, tumor removal) failed to acquire
(air puff)
eyeblink conditioned responses (Figure 8.20). Studies
with animals (e.g., rabbits) have shown that within the
(B) Trace conditioning
cerebellum, eyeblink delay conditioning is particularly
dependent on the interpositus nucleus and the cerebellar
Conditioned stimulus
cortex. In the usual eyeblink conditioning paradigm,
(tone)
both of these structures receive information about the
tone (CS) from the auditory system and information
about the air puff (US) from the visual and somatic
sensory systems. Supporting the critical role of the
500–1000 ms
interpositus nucleus, lesions or transient disruption
of this structure lead to deficits in the acquisition and
retention of eyeblink delay conditioning. Supporting
Unconditioned stimulus
(air puff)
the role of the cerebellar cortex, mutant mice deficient in

268 ■ CHAPTER 8
Purkinje cells (the output neurons of the cerebellar cortex) are impaired
in eyeblink conditioning. As the interpositus nucleus and the cerebellar
6
cortex receive information about the CS and the US, both structures
are potentially capable of supporting CS-US associations. Moreover,
the deep cerebellar nuclei, including the interpositus nucleus, consti4
tute the final common pathway for output from the cerebellar cortex
to other brain regions that control the execution of motor behaviors.
The major difference between the neural correlates of delay and
2
trace conditioning is the role of the hippocampus. Although electrophysiological studies using the eyeblink paradigm in rabbits show
0
the hippocampus to be involved in delay conditioning, damage to the
1
2
3
4
5
6
hippocampus does not impair delay conditioning. In contrast, damage
Acquisition block
to the hippocampus impairs trace conditioning in both experimental
Figure 8.20 Cerebellar damage impairs eyeblink animals and human patients.
conditioning in humans Mean eyelid conditioned
The finding that trace conditioning depends on the hippocampus
response (CR) frequency in patients with cerebellar
creates a problem for the standard taxonomy of memory systems. Is
lesions and normal control subjects across
trace conditioning truly a form of nondeclarative memory, then, or is
acquisition blocks. (After Daum et al. 1993.)
it a form of declarative memory? A possible resolution was provided
by a study that investigated delay and trace eyeblink conditioning
in amnesia patients with hippocampal damage and in control participants.
Immediately after conditioning, participants completed a questionnaire that
included a number of questions about their awareness of CS-US contingencies.
The results showed that none of the amnesia patients were aware of CS-US
contingencies. Nonetheless, all the participants showed delay conditioning
(Figure 8.21A). This outcome is consistent with the idea that the delay form of
nondeclarative memory is independent of conscious awareness and the hippocampus. In contrast, only the control participants who were aware showed trace
conditioning (Figure 8.21B). Thus, trace conditioning depends on awareness of
temporal contingencies among stimuli, at least in humans, and is effectively a
form of declarative rather than nondeclarative memory.
Turning to operant conditioning, we must distinguish between two main
categories of this sort of behavior. Imagine that the route you take when you
drive home every evening is characterized by a particular intersection where
you always turn right. Turning right because you want to arrive home is a goaldirected action; automatically turning right because you always turn right at that
CR frequency

Control subjects
Subjects with
cerebellar lesions

(B)

Aware controls
Unaware controls
Unaware amnesia patients

Differential conditioned responses (%)

Figure 8.21 Delay and trace
eyeblink conditioning in humans Test
results for amnesia patients versus
controls indicate an underlying difference between delay and trace conditioning. Graphs plot the percentage
of differential conditioned eyeblink
(CR – CS/CR × 100). (A) All groups
showed delay conditioning. (B) Only
the control group was aware of the
relationship between the tone and
the air puff, and only this group
showed trace conditioning. These
results indicate that trace conditioning
depends on the awareness of CS-US
contingencies and therefore suggest
that trace conditioning is a form of
declarative memory. (After Clark and
Squire 1998.)

Differential conditioned responses (%)

(A)

30

20

10

0

–10
2

3

4

20

10

0

–10

Delay (1250)
1

30

5

6

Trace (1000)
1

Blocks of 20 trials

2

3

4

5

6

MEMORY: VARIETIES AND MECHANISMS
(A)

(B)

Training

Reward

Response

Testing

Place

■ 269

Figure 8.22 Place and response strategies in a cross
maze (A) During training, rodents are always placed in
the same arm of a maze and reach the food reward by
always making the same response (e.g., right turn). (B)
On testing, they are placed in a different arm, where they
can make either a different response (e.g., left turn) to
go to the same place where the reward was previously
located (place strategy) or the same response (e.g., right
turn) to go to a new arm (response strategy). During
testing, only the place arm is baited. (After Yin and
Knowlton 2006.)

intersection is a stimulus-driven habit. Imagine now that the street where you
turn right is blocked and you know that. Avoiding the right turn and using an
alternate route indicates that the right turn was goal-directed. But turning right
anyway, making an error, is a sign that the action was habitual. In other words,
goal-directed actions are sensitive to action-outcome (A-O) contingencies, whereas
stimulus-driven habits are controlled by stimulus-response (S-R) associations.
One way to investigate the distinction between goal-directed actions and
stimulus-driven habits uses a paradigm that resembles the driving example.
During training, rodents were always placed in the same arm of a maze and
had to locate the food reward by always making the same response (right turn
in Figure 8.22A). Once they had learned this behavior, they were placed in a
different arm (Figure 8.22B), where they could make either a different response
to go to a previous reward arm (place strategy) or the same response (a right turn)
to go to a new arm (response strategy). After moderate initial training, most rats
used the place strategy (goal-directed), but if the hippocampus was damaged
they shifted to a response strategy (habit). After extensive training, rats with
intact brains used a response strategy (habit), but if the dorsal striatum (caudate
and putamen) was lesioned, they used a place strategy (goal-directed). This
double dissociation suggests that goal-directed A-O learning depends on the
hippocampus, whereas habitual S-R learning depends on the dorsal striatum.
However, later rodent evidence showed that some regions of the dorsal
striatum play an important role in A-O learning. The distinction between A-O
and S-R regions of the dorsal striatum corresponds to the distinction between
associative and sensory-motor cortico-basal-ganglia loops introduced in Chapter
5 (see Figure 5.21). Some of the evidence is from paradigms in which rodents
learn to press one lever for one type of food and another lever for a different type
of food. One type of food is then made undesirable (devaluated) by producing
satiation or taste aversion specific to that food. If behavior is goal-directed, it
should decrease in frequency; but if it is habitual, it should continue even if the
outcome is undesirable. Studies using this approach have shown that damage to
the dorsomedial striatum, which corresponds to the caudate (associative loop),
impairs goal-directed A-O learning; whereas damage to the dorsolateral striatum, which corresponds to the putamen (sensory-motor loop), impairs habitual
S-R learning. Converging evidence from humans has been found using fMRI.
In sum, conditioning includes classical and operant variants. Classical conditioning is the alteration of an innate reflex, which responds to an unrelated
stimulus (CS) that reliably predicts its normal triggering stimulus (US). In delay
conditioning, the CS and US overlap; in trace conditioning the CS ends before
the US is presented. The most popular nonemotional classical conditioning
paradigm is eyeblink conditioning, in which a tone elicits a blink after repeated
pairing with an air puff. Delay eyeblink conditioning is critically dependent on

270 ■ CHAPTER 8
the cerebellum. Trace eyeblink conditioning also depends on the hippocampus,
but this relationship may reflect contributions of declarative memory. Operant conditioning (instrumental learning) is a change in the probability of a
behavioral response associated with a reward (or punishment). Instrumental
behaviors include flexible goal-directed actions and inflexible stimulus-driven
habits. Whereas goal-directed actions depend more on the dorsomedial striatum
(caudate) and the hippocampus, stimulus-driven habits are more dependent
on the dorsolateral striatum (putamen).

Cellular Mechanisms of Memory
The preceding sections reviewed the major neural substrates of memory at the
system level—that is, the extent to which memory depends on gross anatomical structures such as the medial temporal lobes, the cortex, the basal ganglia,
and the cerebellum. At the system level the neural substrates of memory are
clearly heterogeneous. At the cellular and molecular levels, however, all the forms
of memory seem to depend on changes in neural connectivity and the relative
strength of synaptic transmission.
Early in the twentieth century, the German evolutionary biologist Richard
Semon coined the term engram to refer to the physical and biochemical changes
underlying memory storage in the brain. Two related questions about engrams,
or memory traces, have long fascinated neuroscientists: where are they located
in the brain, and how, in neurobiological terms, are they formed?
With respect to the where question, an early idea inspired by Pavlovian conditioning was that engrams depend on the integrity of the pathways connecting
sensory and motor regions. In the 1920s, American neuroscientist Karl Lashley
tested this idea by making cuts in a rat’s cortex that would disconnect sensory
and motor regions before or after the rats learned to run mazes. Lashley found
that the location of the lesions did not matter much, and that only the extent of
the tissue destroyed was consequential. This finding is consistent with the idea
that an engram consists of a network of neurons with connections distributed
over the cortex; thus, only when a large proportion of the network is destroyed is
the engram seriously compromised (see the discussion of graceful degradation
in Box 8C). This idea does not imply that engrams are randomly distributed.
As mentioned already, the modern view is that engrams are defined primarily
by the connectivity of the brain regions originally involved in processing the
relevant category of information. That is, memory traces for visual information
are stored mostly in visual cortices, those for auditory information in auditory
cortices, those for motor skills in the motor cortices, and so on.
This general answer to the question of where engrams are located suggests
an answer to how they are formed. If engrams consist of networks of neurons,
then they are formed by a process whereby neurons that once functioned
relatively independently begin to work together by virtue of strengthened
connections between them. This broad answer was first explicitly proposed in
1949 by Canadian psychologist Donald Hebb, who hypothesized that memories
are stored in the brain in the form of networks of neurons that he called cell
assemblies. Hebb’s idea was that through experience (i.e., learning), assemblies
gradually become specifically associated with objects, actions, or concepts. To
explain how the relevant neurons come to be linked, he proposed that when
presynaptic and postsynaptic neurons are simultaneously active (i.e., fire action potentials at the same time), the synaptic connections between them are
strengthened. As a result, synaptic associations grow stronger and tend to
persist. This mechanism, known today as Hebbian learning, is captured in the
adage “cells that fire together wire together.”

MEMORY: VARIETIES AND MECHANISMS

■ 271

■ BOX 8C CONNECTIONIST MODELS

U

nlike sequential processing
models, connectionist models assume that information processing
occurs in parallel across a large number of distributed units. For this reason,
these models are also known as parallel
distributed processing (PDP) models.
The units, or nodes, in connectionist
schemes are linked in a network, much
as neurons are interconnected in the
brain. Thus, connectionist models are
also known as neural network models.
An example is the model of writtenword recognition developed by cognitive scientists James McClelland and his
colleague David Rumelhart. Like other
connectionist models, it is a network
consisting of layers of units. The units of
the input layer receive information from
the environment; in this example, each
input unit receives visual information and
responds to one particular feature of a
written letter (e.g., a horizontal line). The
output layer consists of units that indicate
the outcomes of the processing within
the network. Given that this is a model of
word recognition, the output units correspond to all the words the model can recognize. Finally, input and output units are
connected through one or more hidden
layers, so called because their units are
invisible from the outside. For simplicity,
the model in the example here shows only
a few letter features, letters, and words.
The network shown responds to
only the first letter of each word; similar
networks would be required to recognize
each of the other letters. The connections between units can be excitatory or
inhibitory. Some excitatory and inhibitory
connections in the figure are obvious. For
example, the letter a excites the word
able but inhibits the word trap because
able starts with an a but trap does not.
The inhibitory connections among the
units within the same layer ensure that
one option will tend to win out over the
others. Activation flows not only from input to output layers but also from output
to input layers (e.g., the excitatory connection from able to the letter a).
To see how the model works, consider
the sentence “John packed his suitcase
and left for a trip.” Before such a network reaches the end of the sentence,
the node for the word trip is activated by
semantic associations from the words
suitcase and left (not shown in the figure).
This activation facilitates the identification
of the letters t, r, i, and p and thus the
corresponding feature detectors. At the

Output: word identification

ABLE

TIME

TRIP
TRAP

A

Excitatory
Inhibitory

CART

TAKE

N

T

G

S

Visual input

A connectionist model for written-word recognition. Note that the feature and letter units represent only the first position in each four-letter word. (After McClelland and Rumelhart 1981.)

same time, activation flows in the opposite direction from feature to letter to word
detectors in the input layer. A strength of
models like this is that they specify how
conceptually driven processing (already
established in the network) and datadriven processing might interact. Another strength is that they entail a built-in
learning mechanism: the modification of
connection weights represents stored
information that alters the output.
In computer simulations, networks are
often “trained” using supervised learning
algorithms such as back-propagation,
in which the actual output (e.g., trap) is
compared to the desired output (e.g.,
trip) and the weights of the connections
from the layers below are modified to

reduce subsequent errors. Learning can
also be unsupervised; for example, the
strength of the connection between units
may be automatically increased whenever the units are simultaneously active
(Hebbian learning, described in the text).
PDP models are attractive in cognitive neuroscience because changing the
strength of synaptic connections through
individual experience or natural selection
is clearly the major way nervous systems
store information. The assumption that
knowledge is not stored in a single location but is distributed across numerous
sites is also consistent with much neu(Continued on next page)

272 ■ CHAPTER 8

■ BOX 8C (continued)
robiological evidence. Local damage to
either the brain or a connectionist model
typically degrades performance but
doesn’t abolish it altogether—a phenomenon called graceful degradation.
At the same time, connectionist
models have several limitations, including difficulty accounting for rule-based
processes in human reasoning; difficulty
discerning the strategies being used to
solve problems by examining weight patterns of the trained network architecture;
and, consequently, difficulty distinguishing among alternative models of the
same cognitive process. These caveats
notwithstanding, connectionist models

have provided cognitive scientists with
important insights and a powerful tool.

References
HAYKIN, S. (1998) Neural Networks: A Comprehensive Foundation, 2nd Ed. New York:
Prentice-Hall.
MCCLELLAND, J. L. AND D. E. RUMELHART
(1981) An interactive activation model of
context effects in letter perception: Part 1.
An account of basic findings. Psychol. Rev.
88: 375–407.
MCCLELLAND, J. L., D. E. RUMELHART AND
G. E. HINTON (2002) The appeal of parallel distributed processing. In Foundations

of Cognitive Psychology: Core Reading, D. J.
Levitin (ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
pp. 57–91.
MCCLELLAND, J. L., D. E. RUMELHART AND
THE PDP RESEARCH GROUP (1986) Parallel

Distributed Processing: Explorations in the
Microstructure of Cognition. Vol. 2: Psychological and Biological Models. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
RUMELHART, D. E., J. L. MCCLELLAND AND
THE PDP RESEARCH GROUP (1986) Parallel

Distributed Processing: Explorations in the
Microstructure of Cognition. Vol. 1: Foundations. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Even though they were articulated more than 50 years ago, Hebb’s proposals,
in essence, remain a plausible basis for understanding memory in cellular terms.
Only in the last few decades, however, have neuroscientists begun to understand
some of the cellular and molecular mechanisms that allow a strengthening of
synaptic connectivity as a result of coincident neuronal activity.

Habituation and sensitization
One of the main difficulties in investigating the cellular bases of memory is
the sheer complexity of neuronal circuits and behaviors, particularly in the
mammalian brain. One way to simplify this problem is to investigate memory
mechanisms in an organism with fewer neurons and a more limited behavioral repertoire. Neuroscientist Eric Kandel and his colleagues pioneered this
approach when, beginning in the late 1960s, they carried out studies using
the sea slug Aplysia californica. The ganglia that make up the nervous system
in this animal contain only a few thousand neurons, many of which are large
and individually identifiable. Despite the simplicity of its nervous system, the
sea slug shows rudimentary learning abilities, which Kandel and his group
measured in terms of changes in a simple withdrawal reflex.
A sea slug withdraws its gill when its siphon is lightly touched, presumably
as a defensive maneuver, and this simple reflex demonstrates two forms of
learning that occur in many animals, including humans: habituation and sensitization. Habituation is a reduced response when the same stimulus is repeated
over and over; sensitization is an increased response to the habituated stimulus
when it is paired with an aversive stimulus such as a shock to the animal’s tail
(Figure 8.23). Touching the siphon skin stimulates sensory neurons, which in
turn excite interneurons and motor neurons; the excited motor neurons then
elicit withdrawal of the gill.
Electrical recordings show that habituation involves a decrease in neurotransmitter release at the synapses between sensory neurons and motor neurons,
whereas sensitization involves an increase in neurotransmitter release at these
synapses. Whereas the functional changes underlying habituation appear to
be confined to the sensory neuron–motor neuron synapse, the tail shock used
to elicit sensitization recruits a wider array of sensory neurons, which in turn
excite modulatory interneurons that increase neurotransmitter release from
the siphon sensory neurons, enhancing gill withdrawal.

MEMORY: VARIETIES AND MECHANISMS

Both habituation and sensitization are simple forms
of memory. In particular, the modulatory effect of
tail shock on the gill withdrawal reflex lasts a matter
of minutes, and it can thus be regarded as a model
for short-term memory in this system. Moreover,
repeated tail shocks over longer periods trigger gene
expression, new protein synthesis, and the formation
of new synaptic connections, all of which result in
enhancement of the gill withdrawal reflex that can
last weeks—a model of simple long-term memory.

Siphon
skin

Sensory
neuron
Stimulus
shock

+

Interneuron

Tail

Sensory
neuron

Long-term potentiation and depression

A second major advance in understanding the cellular mechanisms of memory was accomplished in
the early 1970s in studies of hippocampal synaptic transmission carried out by
neuroscientists Terje Lømo and Timothy Bliss. As illustrated in Figure 8.24,
the researchers stimulated different afferent pathways (e.g., pathways 1 and
2) and recorded responses in a postsynaptic neuron (postsynaptic potentials).
They found that when one pathway (e.g., pathway 1) was stimulated with a
high-frequency electrical train, the postsynaptic neuron later showed stronger
responses to input from the stimulated pathway but not from other pathways
(e.g., pathway 2). Because this focal enhancement lasted a long time, they called
the phenomenon long-term potentiation (LTP). Although LTP was first localized
in the rabbit hippocampus, subsequent research showed that it occurs in many
other species and brain regions, including the cortex, the amygdala, the basal
ganglia, and the cerebellum. Depending on the locus and stimulation paradigm,
LTP can last tens of minutes, hours, or longer.

(A)

■ 273

+

Gill
Motor
neuron

Modulatory
interneuron

Figure 8.23 Two forms of learning
in the sea slug Aplysia The simple
neuronal circuit in the abdominal
ganglion of the sea slug is used
in studies of habituation and
sensitization. Touching the animal’s
siphon elicits withdrawal of the
gill. When the siphon is repeatedly
touched, this response progressively
decreases (habituation). Conversely,
a shock to the tail enhances the
habituated gill withdrawal response
(sensitization). (After Squire and
Kandel 1999.)

Record
postsynaptic
potentials

Stimulate presynaptic
pathways
Pathway 1

EPSP membrane
potential (mV)

(B)

Pathway 2

Pathway 1

Pathway 2

Stimulus

–50

Stimulus
After stimulation

After stimulation
to pathway 1

–55
–60

Before stimulation
to pathway 1

Before stimulation
–65
0

25

50

75

100
0
Time (ms)

25

50

75

100

Figure 8.24 Long-term potentiation
(LTP) (A) Two pathways in the
hippocampus that can be stimulated
independently. (B) Following highfrequency stimulation (not shown), the
postsynaptic potential elicited by a
single stimulus is enhanced, but only
for the stimulated pathway. EPSP,
excitatory postsynaptic potential.
(After Malinow et al. 1989.)

274 ■ CHAPTER 8
LTP has several properties that advance it as an attractive candidate for one
of the major cellular mechanisms of memory. First, LTP can be induced by a
single high-frequency train of stimulation—a feature that could explain how
some memories can be formed by a single experience. Second, the fact that
LTP can last for days or even weeks could explain the persistence of memory
over these sorts of time intervals. Third, LTP has a degree of specificity that fits
well with the specificity of memories. Only those synapses activated during
stimulation are enhanced; other synapses—even other synapses on the same
neuron—are not affected. Finally, LTP has a property of associativity that could
underlie memory mechanisms such as Hebbian learning: if a weak and a strong
pathway impinging on a target neuron were activated at the same time, then
both pathways would tend to become associated via the output of the target cell.
As suggested by the phenomenon of habituation, synaptic weakening is
equally a part of learning and memory. If synapses continued to increase in
strength because of LTP or a similar mechanism, they would eventually reach
a point of saturation. It makes sense, therefore, for synaptic potentiation to be
counterbalanced by a mechanism of synaptic inhibition. Such a mechanism,
known as long-term depression (LTD), was found in the late 1970s. Whereas LTP
occurs with high-frequency stimulation over a brief period, LTD is elicited
by low-frequency stimulation over a longer period. LTD can also last several
hours and is again specific to activated synapses. As might be expected, LTD
can counteract LTP, and vice versa. There is also some evidence that LTD can
enhance LTP in neighboring synapses and that it can block the formation of
associations that do not follow Hebb’s rule.

Linking LTP to memory performance
Although LTP has many of the properties required for memory storage and
behavior, it has been studied mainly in vitro. Thus, directly linking LTP and
memory performance has been a major research effort in recent years.
One approach has been to seek evidence of behavioral LTP—that is, a demonstrated change in synaptic efficacy similar to LTP that follows a natural learning
experience. For example, rats raised in an enriched stimulatory environment
show enhanced postsynaptic potentials when compared to rats raised in an
environment impoverished in stimulation and learning experiences. The enhancement disappears within a few weeks if the enriched rats are placed in the
impoverished environment, suggesting that enriched experience is necessary to
maintain strong synapses. In addition, changes in synaptic efficacy lasting about
30 minutes have been observed in the rat hippocampus following exploration
of a novel environment, which could be indicative of learning and memory
storage. There is also evidence that inducing LTP in sensory pathways can
enhance synaptic responses to natural sensory stimulation, and that learning
experiences can lead to long-term increases in correlated firing among hippocampal neurons that were active during learning (thus showing associativity).
Another approach to linking LTP to naturally occurring learning and memory
has been to prevent LTP and then determine whether memory is impaired. One
way to disrupt LTP is to use “knockout” mice in which a gene for a protein
crucial to LTP is eliminated by gene splicing techniques. Neuroscientist Susumu
Tonegawa and his colleagues produced a strain of mice that lacked the gene for
NMDA receptors in hippocampal region CA1. This receptor protein mediates
certain forms of LTP, and indeed the knockout mice showed little or no LTP in
the CA1 region of the hippocampus. Mice lacking NMDA receptors were also
severely impaired in spatial learning (a property mediated by the hippocampus
in rodents), although they were unimpaired in nonspatial learning. Whereas
control mice searched for a platform hidden in a water tank only near the location where the platform had been located in previous trials (the Morris water

MEMORY: VARIETIES AND MECHANISMS
(A) Control

(B) Knockout

–20

–15

–10

–5

0

5

10

15

20

Figure 8.25 Genetic impact on learning the water maze task (A) The landscape
shows that control mice focused their search in the trained area, resulting in a high
total occupancy peak (yellow) in the old platform position, which they apparently
remembered. (B) Laboratory mice in which the gene for NMDA receptors was
eliminated (“knocked out)” in the hippocampus navigated more or less randomly
over the full area of the pool, apparently failing to have learned where the platform
should be located. (From Tsien et al. 1996.)

maze; see Box 8A), the NMDA-deficient mice searched widely for the platform,
indicating that they had little spatial memory (Figure 8.25).
Efforts to establish behaviorally relevant evidence of LTP involvement have
not been limited to the hippocampus or to spatial learning. In the mid-1990s,
neuroscientist Joseph LeDoux and collaborators investigated behavioral LTP in
the context of auditory fear conditioning, focusing on the pathway connecting
the medial geniculate nucleus of the thalamus (a relay station in the auditory
sensory pathways; see Chapter 4) to the amygdala. They found that electrical stimulation of this pathway gave rise to LTP in the lateral nucleus of the
amygdala, in accord with the fact that synaptic responses in the same nucleus
are enhanced by natural auditory stimulation. Although this question is far
from settled, there is at least some evidence that LTP is correlated with newly
learned behaviors.

Learning-related changes in synaptic morphology
Maintenance of any mechanism of memory that is to last for a long period
requires gene expression and the synthesis of new proteins. Among other effects, these changes can, and in some cases do, lead to long-lasting structural
alternations in synapses. These morphological changes in neuronal connectivity can be considered the culmination of a process of synaptic consolidation
discussed in Chapter 9.
For many neurons, learning-related alterations in synaptic morphology
appear to involve dendritic spines. These are small protrusions from dendritic
branches—often mushroom-shaped—that in the neocortex receive excitatory
synaptic input from other neurons. Several sorts of morphological changes in
dendritic spine structure over periods of a few minutes to hours have been

■ 275

276 ■ CHAPTER 8
(A)

(B)

(C)

LTP

LTP

Ca2+

LTP
learning

Ca2+

(D)

Figure 8.26 Morphological changes in dendritic spines associated
with the maintenance of LTP (A) Synapses may increase in number
of presynaptic vesicles, postsynaptic receptors, and ribosomes (red
circles). (B) Synapses may develop separate synaptic zones divided by
a wall or a cleft (perforated synapses) in the spine. (C) A single spine
may divide in two. (D) New dendritic spines (white arrows) appear
approximately 1 hour after a stimulus that induces LTP. (A–C after
Lamprecht and LeDoux 2004; D from Engert and Bonhoeffer 1999.)

LTP

observed, some in parallel with the development of LTP and changes in behavior. The simplest changes are in the length and diameter of the “stem” of the
mushroom (the spine neck) and/or changes in the size of the mushroom itself
(Figure 8.26A). The former changes affect passage of the synaptic signal from
the spine to the dendritic shaft, and the latter allow a change in the number of
presynaptic terminals in contact with a spine (Figure 8.26B,C). Finally, new
spines can emerge from the shaft of the dendrite and others disappear, thereby
changing the number of spines and thus synapses in yet another way (Figure
8.26D). All such changes could support memories or their loss by increasing
or decreasing synaptic strength over long periods.
In summary, the physical representations of memories (engrams) are assumed to consist of functional and structural changes in synaptic connectivity
among neurons that have strengthened or weakened as a result of experience.
Long-term maintenance of LTP and other memory mechanisms presumably
requires changes in gene expression and the synthesis of new proteins that
eventually lead to structural alternations in synaptic morphology and neuronal
connectivity. This commonality of mechanisms at the cellular level is quite
compatible with functional heterogeneity at the systems level.

Summary
1. The generally accepted taxonomy of memory systems distinguishes three major
systems: declarative memory, nondeclarative memory, and working memory.
Damage to the medial temporal lobe impairs declarative memory but spares
working memory. Other types of lesions can impair working memory without
disrupting declarative memory.
2. Nondeclarative memory depends on brain regions other than medial temporal
lobes, which vary for different forms of nondeclarative memory: priming, skill
learning, and conditioning.
3. Priming is defined as a change in processing of a stimulus due to a previous
encounter with the same or a related stimulus in the absence of conscious awareness of the original encounter. The neural correlates of priming include neocortical
regions that vary with the type of priming: visual perceptual priming is associated
with altered activity in the visual sensory areas in occipitotemporal cortex; conceptual priming, with anterior left inferior prefrontal areas; and semantic priming,

MEMORY: VARIETIES AND MECHANISMS
with left anterior temporal areas. In functional neuroimaging studies of priming,
these regions typically show a reduction in activity, known as repetition suppression, which may reflect a dropping out of noncritical neurons across repetitions.
4. Skill learning depends on the basal ganglia and is associated with cortical regions
that depend on the type of skill learning (motor regions for motor learning, temporal fusiform regions for perceptual learning, and so on).
5. Conditioning is the altered probability of a behavioral response engendered by
associating the response with a reward. Eyeblink conditioning has been linked to
circuits in the cerebellum. Operant conditioning (instrumental learning) has been
associated with the basal ganglia.
6. All varieties of memory appear to depend on the same cellular and molecular
mechanisms of neural plasticity. At the cellular level, memories are transiently
stored as changes in the efficacy of existing synaptic connections between neurons
within particular neuronal assemblies. Longer-lasting memories require more permanent changes in gene expression, protein synthesis, and morphology, including
the formation of new synaptic connections.

Additional Reading
Reviews
DAYAN, E. AND L. G. COHEN (2011) Neuroplasticity subserving motor skill
learning. Neuron 72: 443–454.
FOERDE, K. AND D. SHOHAMY (2011) The
role of the basal ganglia in learning and
memory: Insight from Parkinson’s disease. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 96: 624–636.
GRILL-SPECTOR, K., R. HENSON AND A.
MARTIN (2006) Repetition and the brain:
Neural models of stimulus-specific
effects. Trends Cogn. Sci. 10: 14–23.
MILNER, B., L. R. SQUIRE AND E. R. KANDEL (1998) Cognitive neuroscience
and the study of memory. Neuron 20:
445–468.
NADEL, L. AND O. HARDT (2011) Update
on memory systems and processes.
Neuropsychopharmacology 36: 251–273.
SANES, J. R. AND J. W. LICHTMAN (1999)
Can molecules explain long-term
potentiation? Nat. Neurosci. 7: 597–604.
SQUIRE, L. R., C. E. STARK AND R. E. CLARK
(2004) The medial temporal lobe. Annu.
Rev. Neurosci. 27: 279–306.
YIN, H. H. AND B. J. KNOWLTON (2006)
The role of the basal ganglia in habit
formation. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 7:
464–476.

Important Original Papers
BUCKNER, R. L., S. E. PETERSEN, J. G. OJEMANN, F. M. MIEZIN, L. R. SQUIRE AND
M. E. RAICHLE (1995) Functional anatomical studies of explicit and implicit
memory retrieval tasks. J. Neurosci. 7:
12–29.
CLARK, R. E. AND L. R. SQUIRE (1998) Classical conditioning and brain systems:
The role of awareness. Science 280:
77–81.
GABRIELI, J. D. E., D. A. FLEISHMAN, M. M.
KEANE, S. L. REMINGER AND F. MORRELL
(1995) Double dissociation between
memory systems underlying explicit
and implicit memory in the human
brain. Psychol. Sci. 6: 76–82.
GRAF, P., L. R. SQUIRE AND R. MANDLER
(1984) The information that amnesic
patients do not forget. J. Exp. Psychol.
Learn. Mem. Cogn. 10: 164–178.
HENSON, R., T. SHALLICE AND R. DOLAN
(2000) Neuroimaging evidence for dissociable forms of repetition priming.
Science 287: 1269–1272.
KNOWLTON, B. J., J. A. MANGELS AND L.
R. SQUIRE (1996) A neostriatal habit
learning system in humans. Science 262:
1747–1749.

■ 277

Go to the COMPANION WEBSITE
sites.sinauer.com/cogneuro2e
for quizzes, animations, flashcards,
and other study resources.

MILLER, E. K., L. LI AND R. DESIMONE
(1991) A neural mechanism for working and recognition memory in inferior
temporal cortex. Science 254: 1377–1379.
POLDRACK, R. A. AND 7 OTHERS (2001)
Interactive memory systems in the
human brain. Nature 414: 546–550.
WARRINGTON, E. K. AND L. WEISKRANTZ
(1968) New method of testing longterm retention with special reference to
amnesic patients. Nature 217: 972–974.
YIN, H. H., B. J. KNOWLTON AND B. W.
BALLEINE (2004) Lesions of dorsolateral
striatum preserve outcome expectancy
but disrupt habit formation in instrumental learning. Eur. J. Neurosci. 19:
181–189.

Books
FOSTER, J. K. AND M. JELICIC (1999)
Memory: Systems, Process, or Function?
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
EICHENBAUM, H. (2011) The Cognitive
Neuroscience of Memory: An Introduction.
New York: Oxford University Press.

