9
Declarative Memory

INTRODUCTION
Although nondeclarative forms of memory, such as priming, skill
learning, and conditioning, are pervasive in everyday life, declarative
memory is what most people mean when they use the term memory—
namely, the ability to consciously remember personally experienced
events (I parked the car near the exit of the parking lot) and facts shared
with others (the name of the actress was so-and-so). Although declarative memory is linked to consciousness, it can be studied in non-human
animals (in which consciousness is assumed) by using memory tasks
similar to the ones that depend on human declarative memory (for nonhuman declarative memory tests; see Box 8A).
As noted in Chapter 8, declarative memory is critically dependent on
the integrity of the medial temporal lobes. However, this type of memory involves other brain parts as well, including regions of the prefrontal
cortex and the posterior parietal cortex. During encoding, memories
are assumed to be stored in the medial temporal lobes, as well as in the
relevant cortical regions (visual, auditory, and so on), where they are assumed to be made longer lasting by a process called memory consolidation. During retrieval, memory traces in these cortical regions are reactivated, leading to the conscious experience of remembering. Prefrontal
and parietal regions are thought to provide the executive and attentional
control needed to process and integrate incoming information during
encoding, and to select and evaluate memories during retrieval. Although this basic description applies to all forms of declarative memory,
there are important differences between declarative memory for events,
called episodic memory, and memory for facts, called semantic memory
(see Introductory Box). There are also differences between two forms of
episodic memory, known as recollection and familiarity.

280 ■ CHAPTER 9

■ INTRODUCTORY BOX DEVELOPMENTAL AMNESIA
Compared to control subjects,
three children with developmental
amnesia—Beth, Jon, and Kate—
who showed hippocampal atrophy
(A) were impaired in visual memory
but not visual perception (B). They
were also impaired in episodic but
not working memory tasks, for
both verbal and nonverbal stimuli
(C). Remarkably, the three children showed normal reading and
comprehension abilities (D). (After
Vargha-Khadem et al. 1997.)

(e.g., copying the pattern in
Figure B) and working memory
abilities (Figure C) of these children were relatively intact.
Another surprising aspect
of these cases is that, despite significant hippocampal
atrophy and episodic memory
impairments, all three children
attended mainstream schools
and displayed normal levels of
speech and language competence, literacy, and factual
knowledge (Figure D). In other
words, they were impaired in
episodic memory but could
acquire semantic knowledge at
a relatively normal rate.
The dissociation between
impaired episodic memory and
spared semantic memory has
important implications. First, it
supports the idea that the hippocampus is specifically associated with episodic memory
but not semantic memory. It
is not clear which brain region
supports semantic learning in
Beth, Jon, and Kate or the rest
of us, but the implication is
that semantic memory is mediated by the medial temporal
lobe cortices (i.e., the perirhinal, entorhinal, and parahippocampal cortices; see Box 9A).

(A) Hippocampal volume
Left hippocamus
Right hippocampus

4.0

Volume (cm3)

R

ecall from Chapter 8 that patient
H.M. became afflicted with severe
amnesia following surgery that removed much of his medial temporal lobes
on both sides. After the surgery, H.M. was
unable to acquire new declarative memories, including new memories for personally experienced past events (episodic
memory) and new memories about facts
and language (semantic memory). H.M.’s
case left open, however, the question of
what happens when medial temporal lobe
damage is limited to the hippocampus
and spares the surrounding cortices (entorhinal, perirhinal, and parahippocampal
cortices; see Box 9A).
Selective hippocampal damage can
occur when the brain is deprived of appropriate oxygen supply (a condition
known as hypoxia) because this region
has a higher metabolic rate (and thus
greater dependence on oxygen) than do
most other brain areas. Oxygen deprivation is not uncommon during complications at birth, and depending on the
severity of the hypoxia, hippocampal
damage can leave children severely
impaired as a result of inadequate declarative memory. Surprisingly, however,
although these children are impaired in
episodic memory, they acquire semantic
knowledge relatively normally and are
often able to attend mainstream schools.
The first study of such cases reported
data for three children who likely suffered hypoxia: Beth, Jon, and Kate. Brain
imaging showed hippocampal formations of these children to be smaller than
those of normal controls (Figure A). All
three suffered from episodic memory
deficits, which were noticeable to both
the children and their parents, and were
confirmed by formal testing. For example,
the children were markedly impaired in
their ability draw a complex figure from
memory (Figure B), as well as in other
verbal and nonverbal episodic memory
tasks (Figure C). In contrast, as in the
case of other patients with medial temporal lobe amnesia, the perceptual abilities

Lower limit
of normal

3.0

2.0

1.0

Control

Beth

Jon

Kate

(B) Visual Memory
Copy

Delayed recall

Control

Beth

Jon

Kate

This chapter first introduces some basic concepts and assumptions about
the taxonomy of declarative memory, and the neural mechanisms underlying
encoding, storage, and retrieval. The second section focuses on the nature of
medial temporal lobe representations, distinguishing the role of the hippocampus and other medial temporal lobe structures. The following sections focus
on the organization and access of semantic and episodic memory traces stored
in the cortex, and contributions of the prefrontal and parietal cortices during

DECLARATIVE MEMORY

■ 281

■ INTRODUCTORY BOX (continued)
(C) Working and episodic memory tests
Verbal stimuli

Nonverbal stimuli

50

100
Working memory
Episodic memory

Percent recalled

40

80

30

60

20

40

10

20

0

Control

Beth

Jon

Kate

0

Control

Beth

Jon

Kate

(D) Intellectual abilities
Basic reading

Actual
IQ predicted

Score

120

Reading comprehension

100

80

80

60

60

40

40

20

20

0

Beth

Jon

Kate

References

120

100

0

This dissociation also has implications
for theories of memory development. According to one view, semantic memory
develops after episodic memory because
general concepts (e.g., the idea of a
“dog”) are assumed to be abstracted
from individual experiences (e.g., encountering specific dogs). An alternative
view, however, is that episodic memory
develops after semantic memory, since
understanding the meaning of an event
(what happened) is a requirement for
associating core content to contextual details of the event (where, when,
and how it happened). The finding that
Beth, Jon, and Kate could accumulate
a wealth of semantic knowledge despite
pronounced episodic memory deficits is
consistent with the second view.

DE HAAN, M., M. MISHKIN, T. BALDEWEG
AND F. VARGHA-KHADEM (2006) Human

memory development and its dysfunction
after early hippocampal injury. Trends
Neurosci. 29: 374–381.
SQUIRE, L. R. AND S. ZOLA (1998) Episodic
memory, semantic memory, and amnesia.
Hippocampus 8: 205–211.

Beth

Jon

Kate

encoding and retrieval. Finally, the last section describes what is known about
memory consolidation.

Basic Concepts and Assumptions
This section introduces a few basic terms and hypotheses. One set of terms refer to the different forms of declarative memory, and another, to the processes
describing how declarative memory operates. The section ends with a simple
theory of how these declarative memory processes are mediated by the brain
and basic findings supporting the theory.

A taxonomy of declarative memory
Chapter 8 introduced basic distinctions of working memory, declarative memory,
and nondeclarative memory. Here we focus on different types of declarative
memory (yellow boxes in Figure 9.1). Each type is defined by conscious memory for events versus facts, and the qualities associated with those events and
facts. Memory for events is known as episodic memory, and memory for facts
is known as semantic memory—a distinction introduced by psychologist Endel

VARGHA-KHADEM, F., D. G. GADIAN, K. E.
WATKINS, A. CONNELLY, W. VAN PAESSCHEN AND M. MISHKIN (1997) Differential
effects of early hippocampal pathology on
episodic and semantic memory. Science
277: 376–380.

282 ■ CHAPTER 9

Memory

Working memory

Long-term memory

Declarative (explicit)
memory

Episodic memory
(events)

Nondeclarative (implicit)
memory

Semantic memory
(facts)

Priming

Skill
learning

Conditioning

Autobiographical
memory

Recollection

Familiarity

Figure 9.1 The memory system
taxonomy and forms of declarative
memory The main branches of
the memory system are working
memory, declarative memory, and
nondeclarative memory. Declarative
memory can be subdivided into
episodic memory (conscious memory
for events) and semantic memory
(conscious memory for facts). Both
episodic and semantic memory
contribute to people’s memories of
their own lives, or autobiographical
memory. Episodic memory can be
further subdivided into recollection
and familiarity. Although familiarity is
usually classified as a form of episodic
memory, its mechanisms are also
related to those of semantic memory
and priming.

Tulving in the early 1970s. The term episodic memory thus refers to memories
of events that an individual has experienced personally in a specific place and
at a particular time (i.e., from an episode). In contrast, semantic memory refers
to knowledge about the world that individuals share with other members of
their culture, including the knowledge of a native language and facts learned
in school. For example, remembering listening to reggae music in your living
room last Sunday is an episodic memory, whereas knowing that reggae is a
popular style of Jamaican music characterized by syncopated rhythm is a semantic memory.
In the laboratory, episodic memory is sometimes defined as consisting of
memories encoded during the experiment, such as a list of words presented
on a computer; semantic memory, on the other hand, is defined as information that the participants had encoded before the experiment started, such as
knowing that a dog is a mammal. In life, episodic and semantic memories
interact and to some degree overlap. In fact, memory for the events of our own
lives, called autobiographical memory, is a complex mixture of episodic and
semantic memories (see Figure 9.1). For example, the semantic knowledge that
the river Seine runs through Paris, that the Louvre is a famous museum in
that city, and that long lines are common at famous museums may affect our
reconstruction of autobiographical memories of a particular day actually spent
in Paris. Conversely, semantic memories can also be associated with episodic
memories of the learning events (e.g., the day in French class when Paris was
the topic of discussion).
Episodic memory is typically subdivided into two additional categories:
recollection and familiarity. Recollection refers to memories of a past event that
include specific associations and contextual details; familiarity refers to the sense
that we experienced an event at some point in the past, even though no specific
associations or contextual details come to mind. An example of familiarity without recollection is seeing a person’s face and knowing that you have seen that

DECLARATIVE MEMORY

■ 283

person before, but being unable to remember any specific previous encounter
or information about the person, such as the person’s name. The classification
of familiarity as a form of episodic memory is a topic of some debate because
familiarity involves conscious memory for events, but its neural mechanisms
are related to those underlying semantic memory and priming (dashed arrows
in Figure 9.1).

A simple neurological model of encoding, storage, and retrieval
As illustrated by the case of H.M. described in Chapter 8, damage to the medial
temporal lobe impairs declarative memory but spares nondeclarative forms of
memory, such as priming and skill learning. A generally accepted explanation
of why medial temporal lobe regions are critical for declarative memory is that
they store pointers to the locations of memory traces that were stored in the
cortex during their formation. To pursue this explanation, which provides an
organizing principle for this chapter, it is useful to start with a very simple model
of how different brain regions contribute to the encoding, storage, and retrieval
phases introduced in Chapter 8. The model in Figure 9.2 is described here using episodic memory as an example, but it also applies to semantic memory.
During the encoding phase (Figure 9.2A), different aspects of an event are
thought to be stored in the same regions that are involved in perceiving the
event. For example, memory traces from a birthday party would include memories about the color of the balloons stored in visual cortex, memories about
the music stored in auditory cortex, memories about dancing stored in motor
cortex, and so forth (for simplicity, Figure 9.2A shows only auditory and visual
memory traces). As noted in Chapter 8, memory traces consist of alterations
in the synapses. For example, encoding a memory about a red balloon can be
assumed to involve strengthened synapses between groups of neurons coding
for “red” and for “balloon.” However, remembering a complex event, such as a
birthday party, is much more than remembering simple perceptual associations;
it requires simultaneous access to many different aspects of an event, including
not only what happened but also where, when, and how it happened.
According to the model, simultaneous access to all these traces can be
accomplished because the hippocampus stores a summary representation of
the whole event with pointers to the locations of the traces distributed over
the cortex. This hippocampal representation is sometimes called an index,
emphasizing the idea that the representation is not the main information about
the event, but a pointer to where the main information can be found and accessed, much like the index in this book. In sum, in the encoding of declarative
memory, two types of representations are created: distributed cortical traces
and hippocampal indices.

(A) Encoding phase

(B) Storage phase
(including consolidation)

(C) Retrieval phase
Recent memories

PPC

Remote memories

PPC

PFC

PFC
HC

Event

Figure 9.2 A simple model of
episodic memory encoding, storage,
and retrieval (A) During encoding,
each aspect of an event is stored
in the cortical area involved in
processing (perceiving) this aspect of
the event (visual information is stored
in visual cortex, auditory information
in auditory cortex, and so on). The
hippocampus is assumed to store a
summary representation, or index,
pointing to the locations of memory
distributed over the cortex. (B)
During storage, the traces for some
memories are stabilized—a process
known as consolidation. (C) During
retrieval, a retrieval cue may access
the hippocampal index, which leads
to simultaneous access of the various
cortical traces and the experience of
remembering the original event. HC,
hippocampus; PFC, prefrontal cortex;
PPC, posterior parietal cortex.

Auditory information
Visual information

Retrieval cue
Time

PPC
PFC

284 ■ CHAPTER 9
During the storage phase (Figure 9.2B), some memory traces are strengthened
and become long lasting, whereas other memories are presumably lost. The
strengthening process is known as consolidation and is specifically considered
at the end of the chapter. The assumption that some memories are lost during
storage is difficult or impossible to prove in complex organisms because the fact
that a particular memory cannot be retrieved does not imply that the memory
does not exist; the memory may be available but not accessible. However, in animal models in which learning can be linked to synaptic changes, alterations
in synaptic form and function reverse over time in parallel with behavioral
measures of forgetting, suggesting that some memories do become lost.
The retrieval phase (Figure 9.2C) is usually triggered by a retrieval cue, typically a piece of information associated with a particular aspect of the original
event. Retrieval cues may be external or internal, and the retrieval process may
be involuntary or voluntary. For example, seeing a person at work (external
cue) who was at a recent party may spontaneously remind you of the party
(involuntary retrieval). Alternatively, you can intentionally try to remember the
party (voluntary retrieval) by generating an image of the house where the party
was held or of the host (internal cue). In episodic memory tests in the lab, the
cues are typically external (e.g., the word house provided by the experimenter),
and retrieval is usually voluntary (e.g., trying to recall the word that was paired
with house).
In the case of recent memories, access to cortical traces is assumed to be
mediated by the hippocampus: the retrieval cue accesses the hippocampal
index, which leads to access of the distributed cortical memory traces, and in
turn to the experience of remembering the original event. In the case of remote
memories, however, because direct associations have been created among distributed cortical traces (a process explained in the discussion of consolidation
at the end of the chapter), these traces can be accessed directly by retrieval cues,
bypassing the hippocampus.
So far, we have considered only the roles of the medial temporal lobe and
modality-specific cortical regions. What about other brain regions, including
the prefrontal and posterior parietal regions mentioned earlier (see Figure 9.2)?
Prefrontal regions mediate both semantic/linguistic processes (see Chapter 12)
and executive functions (see Chapter 13) that directly contribute to encoding and
retrieval. During encoding, these processes are thought to help link incoming
stimuli with preexisting knowledge and organize them into meaningful units
that can be more easily remembered. During retrieval, the prefrontal regions
help guide the memory search, evaluate the information recovered, and underlie
decisions about its validity. Posterior parietal regions support attentional control
processes (see Chapter 7), which are critical for selecting information during
encoding and for guiding the memory search during retrieval. Prefrontal and
posterior parietal regions are less critical during storage, but they may play a
role during consolidation.

Using the model to explain the effects of brain damage
The general model can account well for three features of declarative memory
loss following brain damage. First, it can explain well why small lesions in the
cortex tend to produce very mild or no declarative memory deficits, whereas
bilateral lesions of the same size in the medial temporal lobes can produce severe
amnesia. Since the memory traces for one event are distributed over the cortex,
a single lesion is unlikely to destroy associated memory traces (recall Karl Lashley’s experiments and the idea of graceful degradation in connectionist models
described in Box 8C). In contrast, the medial temporal lobes store the locations
of most cortical memory traces within a small region, and hence, damage to
this small region can block access to a vast number of cortical memory traces.

DECLARATIVE MEMORY

To use a simple metaphor, imagine a large, multifloor library with a single
computer in the basement containing the records that show the locations of all
books in the library. Whereas a small fire in one of the floors could damage a
fraction of the books, a similar fire in the basement could destroy the computer
and prevent access to all books stored in the library (a situation analogous to
retrograde amnesia). The books are still there, but one cannot find them without
the computer records. Without the computer, it is also impossible to log the
locations of new books received after the computer damage. These new books
may be accessible immediately after delivery while they are still at the receiving
counter (which would be analogous to working memory), but not after being
shelved somewhere in the library if no record of their storage location is kept
(a situation analogous to anterograde amnesia).
Second, the model can explain why cortical damage can produce selective
memory loss, whereas memory loss following medial temporal lobe damage is
global, affecting all modalities and types of stimuli. For example, some forms
of cortical damage can impair knowledge for living things without disrupting
knowledge for nonliving things, or vice versa (see the discussion of storage
later in the chapter). In contrast, patients with medial temporal lobe amnesia
like H.M. are typically impaired in remembering all kinds of knowledge and
events, regardless of their semantic category or modality. According to the model,
cortical memory traces are organized by modality and can also be organized
by category, but medial temporal lobe regions like the hippocampus store the
indices for all kinds of memory traces. Returning to the library metaphor, whereas
damage in one floor may be selective to one type of book (e.g., poetry books),
damage to the basement computer will affect the records for all types of books.
Finally, the model can explain why medial temporal lobe damage tends
to produce anterograde amnesia together with retrograde amnesia for recent
events (e.g., a few years before the lesion) but usually spares memory for remote
events (e.g., from childhood). According to the model, the cortical traces for
recent memories are disconnected from each other; hence, they can be accessed
together only via the indices stored in the hippocampus. However, as memories
are repeatedly retrieved, their cortical traces become directly associated with
each other, so they can be accessed together independently of the hippocampus.
This process, known as system consolidation, is explained at the end of the chapter. Again using the library metaphor, imagine that each time you gather the
set of “books” associated with one event (e.g., the balloon, music, and dancing
“books” for a particular birthday party), you place Post-it notes on some books
indicating the location of some of the other books in the set. After doing this
many times, finding one or a few books in the set is enough to find all the other
books in the set, even if the basement computer is not available.
The remainder of the chapter focuses on different aspects of the model depicted
in Figure 9.2, including (1) the nature of medial temporal lobe representations,
(2) the cortical regions that store semantic and episodic memory traces, (3) the
contributions of prefrontal regions during encoding and retrieval, (4) the role of
parietal regions during encoding and retrieval, and (5) consolidation processes
during the storage phase.

The Nature of Medial Temporal Lobe Representations
Given the dramatic effects of medial temporal lobe damage in human and nonhuman animals, there is no doubt that these regions play a fundamental role
in episodic memory. However, the specific contributions of different medial
temporal lobe subregions to declarative memory are topics of much debate.
The following sections consider theories of hippocampal function, and theories
about the function of various medial temporal subregions described in Box 9A.

■ 285

286 ■ CHAPTER 9

■ BOX 9A ORGANIZATION OF THE MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE
MEMORY SYSTEM

T

he medial temporal lobe memory
system consists of the hippocampus and the surrounding rhinal
cortex and parahippocampal cortex
(Figure A). The amygdala is located in
the anterior part of the medial temporal
lobe; although it modulates declarative
memory processing, the amygdala is not
considered a memory region per se.
The main output of the hippocampus is the fornix, a tract that connects

(A)
Basal
forebrain

the hippocampus to the mammillary
bodies, and the mammillary bodies in
turn project to the anterior nucleus of
the thalamus. The rhinal cortex consists
of the entorhinal cortex medially, and
the perirhinal cortex laterally (Figure B).
Taken together, the entorhinal, perirhinal,
and parahippocampal cortices constitute the parahippocampal gyrus. (The
parahippocampal gyrus should not be
confused with the parahippocampal cor-

Anterior nucleus
of thalamus

Fornix

(C)

tex, which is only the posterior half of the
gyrus.) The perirhinal and parahippocampal cortices receive inputs from unimodal
and polymodal association areas in
frontal, parietal, temporal, and cingulate
cortices (Figure C). In humans and other
primates, the perirhinal and parahippo-

(A) Medial temporal lobe regions within the
brain. (B) Three-dimensional view of the
subregions of the medial temporal lobe.
(C) Neural connections among medial temporal lobe regions, as well as between these
regions and the rest of the brain. (A–C after
Lavenex and Amaral 2000.)

Hippocampus

CA3

CA1

Dentate
gyrus

Subiculum
Prefrontal
cortex
Mammillary
body

Amygdala

Rhinal
cortex

Parahippocampal
cortex
Hippocampus

Entorhinal cortex

Olfactory
cortex

Hippocampus

(B)

Parahippocampal
cortex

Perirhinal
cortex

Parahippocampal
cortex

Amygdala

Entorhinal
cortex

Perirhinal
cortex

Unimodal association areas

Polymodal association areas

Theories of hippocampal memory function
According to the cognitive map theory proposed by neuroscientists John O’Keefe
and Lynn Nadel, the main role of the hippocampus is to mediate memory for
spatial relations among objects in the environment. The strongest evidence
for this theory is the existence of place cells in the rodent hippocampus. These
neurons become active only when the animal is in a particular spatial location

DECLARATIVE MEMORY

■ 287

■ BOX 9A (continued)
abbreviation, “CA”), and the subiculum
(Figure D). Input from the entorhinal cortex reaches all three hippocampal subregions. In addition, several internal “loops”
connect the dentate gyrus to the CA3
and CA1 regions, to the subiculum, and
then back to entorhinal cortex (Figure E).
Thus, the organization of the medial
temporal lobe can be thought of as a hierarchical sequence in which information
is processed through perirhinal, parahippocampal, and entorhinal cortices, finally
reaching the hippocampus. It is clear,

campal cortices project to the entorhinal
cortex, which provides the predominant
cortical input to the hippocampus.
Of these regions in the medial temporal lobe, the one that has received
the most attention is the hippocampus
(which gets its name derived from its
seahorse-like shape). The hippocampus is not a homogeneous structure
but consists of several interconnected
subregions, including the dentate gyrus,
the cornus Ammon (Latin for “horn of
Ammon,” and often referred to by its

however, that the cortices of the parahippocampal gyrus do not simply funnel
information to the hippocampus. On the
contrary, each of these cortices consists
of several subregions that are densely
associated by reciprocal connections
and clearly carry out extensive processing in their own right. Moreover, these
different cortices are linked to each other
by rich intrinsic connections, and hence
they collaborate in processing incoming
information before it reaches the hippocampus.

References
(D) Nissl-stained coronal section of the hippocampus. The 4-millimeter squares (the typical
spatial resolution of fMRI studies) illustrate the difficulty of distinguishing medial temporal lobe
subregions using functional neuroimaging. ✻, collateral sulcus; ab, angular bundle; cf, choroidal
fissure; DG, dentate gyrus; EC, entorhinal cortex; FG, fusiform gyrus; hf, hippocampal fissure;
PRC, perirhinal cortex; PaS, parasubiculum; PrS, presubiculum; S, subiculum; V, ventricle.
(E) Connections within subregions of the hippocampus, including the entorhinal-dentate-CAsubiculum-entorhinal loop. (D from Amaral 1999.)
(D)

(E)
CA2
CA3
V CA1

CA3

CA2

S

PrS

PaS

Dentate
gyrus

Hippo
CA3

cf
hf

DG

LAVENEX, P. AND D. G. AMARAL (2000)
Hippocampal-neocortical interaction: A
hierarchy of associativity. Hippocampus 10:
420–430.

Perforant pathway

G

DG

AMARAL, D. G. (1999) Introduction: What
is where in the medial temporal lobe? Hippocampus 9: 1–6.

Entorhinal cortex

Schaffer collateral
pathway
Hippo
CA1

ab
PRC
FG

EC

in its local environment (Figure 9.3A). Place cells also have been identified in
the human hippocampus. For example, one study had epileptic patients with
implanted electrodes play a “taxi driver” computer game in which they had to
drive passengers to target locations in a virtual town (Figure 9.3B). As in rats,
some neurons of the hippocampus were active only when the “taxi” passed
through specific locations of the simulated town.
According to the relational memory theory put forward by neuroscientists
Howard Eichenbaum and Neal Cohen, the hippocampus mediates memory
for new associations in general. Consistent with this idea, the hippocampus is
critical for remembering nonspatial associations in rodents, such as new associations between odors. In the odor association task, for example, treats such
as Froot Loops cereal are hidden in cups of differently odorized sand (Figure
9.4A). Rats are trained to prefer Odor A over Odor B, Odor B over Odor C, Odor

Mossy fiber
pathway

Hippo
subiculum

288 ■ CHAPTER 9
(A)
5
4
3
2
1
H2

(B)

SC

SB

20
15
10
5
0

H

PR
A
Region

FR

Figure 9.3 Place cells in the hippocampus (A) In the rat, place cells fire when
the animal is in a specific spatial location—for example, in an open circular cage.
The color code here shows the firing pattern of eight different place cells, with red
indicating intense activity. Note that each cell being recorded from is active only
when the rat is in a particular position in its environment (shown here, from above,
as the circular arena the animal is exploring). The color scale shows the cell firing
rate in hertz. (B) A neuron in the human hippocampus was active only when the
subject was in a specific location (red square) of a virtual town (red lines indicate
the trajectory of the “taxi”). Lettered squares are store locations, and blank white
squares are nontarget buildings. The graph on the right shows that although most
place cells in humans were found in the hippocampus (H), some were also found in
the parahippocampal region (PR), the amygdala (A), and the frontal lobes (FR). (B
from Ekstrom et al. 2003.)

(A)

(B)
100
90

Figure 9.4 Relational memory for odor associations and
transitive inference in rodents (A) In this paradigm, declarative
memory is indexed by a rat’s ability to choose cups associated
with a series of odors that have been differentially rewarded.
(B) Rats with fornix (FX) lesions that disrupt hippocampal output
can remember their choices within individual odor pairs (B >
C and C > D), but they fail to show memories for relationships
across pairs (B > D). (After Dusek and Eichenbaum 1997.)

Correct choice (%)

SA

Responsive cells (%)

25

Premises: A > B
B>C
C>D
D>E

Control
FX

80
70
60
Chance

50
40

BC and CD
(within pairs)

BD
(across pairs)

DECLARATIVE MEMORY
Figure 9.5 Amnesia patient K.C. (A) K.C.’s ability to play chess and to remember
general knowledge of the world (semantic memory) was not affected by his
brain lesions. (B) Sagittal MRI slice showing K.C.’s bilateral hippocampal and
parahippocampal damage. (A from Tulving 2002; B from Rosenbaum et al. 2000.)

C over Odor D, and so on. Rats with fornix lesions, which disrupt the output of
the hippocampus, can remember trained pairs, such as B is better than C and
C is better than D, but they cannot infer relationships across pairs, such as B is
better than D (transitive inference; Figure 9.4B).
The episodic memory theory, promoted by Endel Tulving, Morris Moscovitch,
and other researchers, postulates that the hippocampus is critical for episodic
memory but not for semantic memory. Consistent with this view, selective
hippocampal damage tends to impair episodic more than semantic memory.
As mentioned in the Introductory Box, children with hypoxia-related hippocampal damage are severely impaired in episodic memory but can acquire
new vocabulary and knowledge.
Another example is the amnesia patient K.C. (Figure 9.5A), who suffered
a motorcycle accident in which he sustained damage to several brain regions,
including the hippocampus (Figure 9.5B). As with patient H.M., K.C.’s intellectual abilities were well preserved: he is able to read, write, and play chess
at much the same level as before his accident. However, he cannot remember
events that happened before or after the accident (i.e., he has both anterograde
and retrograde amnesia). By contrast, his memory for semantic information
acquired before the accident is intact. He has a good vocabulary, and his knowledge of subjects such as mathematics, history, and geography is similar to that
of others with comparable education. He has difficulty forming new semantic
memories but can learn simple semantic associations with many repetitions.
Thus, medial temporal lobe damage can, in at least some cases, impair episodic
memory while sparing retrograde semantic memory.
Moreover, whereas hippocampal lesions impair episodic more than semantic memory, damage to cortical regions in the anterior temporal lobe tends to
disrupt semantic more than episodic memory. The latter pattern is displayed by
patients with the progressive disorder known as semantic dementia. Semantic
dementia is a variant of frontotemporal dementia, which typically starts with
word-finding deficits (anomia) and progresses into a severe loss of knowledge
and language. For example, patient A.M., who displayed the left anterior temporal atrophy typical for this disorder (Figure 9.6A), was severely impaired in
nonverbal semantic knowledge tests (e.g., deciding whether a pyramid shape
fits better with palm trees or with pine trees; Figure 9.6B), but performed
(A)
(B)

■ 289

(A)

(B)

Figure 9.6 Semantic dementia
(A) Coronal-section MRI of A.M.,
a patient with semantic dementia,
showing severe left-lateralized atrophy
of the anterior temporal cortex,
including the parahippocampal,
fusiform, and inferior temporal gyri.
The left hippocampus is only mildly
atrophied. (B) Subjects suffering from
semantic dementia perform poorly
on tests of semantic knowledge such
as the “pyramid and palm trees” test.
Here participants are asked to indicate
which of the bottom two images fits
better with the top image. (A from
Hodges and Graham 2001.)

290 ■ CHAPTER 9
(A) Left hippocampus
0.4
Correct R
Correct K
Correct rejection
Miss

0.3

fMRI signal change (%)

0.2
0.1
0
–0.1
–0.2
–0.3
–0.4

(B)

Probability estimates

Figure 9.7 Evidence for a greater hippocampal role in recollection
than in familiarity (A) In this fMRI study, the hippocampus showed greater
activity for recognition responses based on recollection (“remember,” or R,
responses) than for those based on familiarity (“know,” or K, responses).
(B) Compared to controls, rats with selective hippocampal lesions are
impaired in recollection but not in familiarity. (A after Eldridge et al. 2000;
B after Fortin et al. 2004.)

0

5

10
Time (s)

Familiarity

15

Recollection

0.4

0.2

0

Control

Lesions

Control

Lesions

normally on nonverbal episodic memory tasks (e.g., delayed recall of the
complex figure in the Introductory Box). Thus, the combined results of
amnesia and semantic dementia cases suggest that the hippocampus is
more critical for episodic than semantic memory, whereas left anterior
temporal cortex is more critical for semantic than episodic memory.
Evidence regarding hippocampal function can be consistent with
more than one theory. For example, evidence that the hippocampus
is associated with recollection rather than familiarity fits well with
both relational memory and episodic memory theories because recollection requires relational memory and is also the prototypical form
of episodic memory. Several methods have been used to distinguish
recollection from familiarity. In one method, participants are asked to
use introspection to distinguish between recognition trials that elicit
memory for contextual details (“remember,” or R, responses) and trials in which the item is recognized but no contextual details come to
mind (“know,” or K, responses).
Consistent with both the relational and episodic memory theories,
fMRI studies have shown that “remember” responses tend to elicit greater
hippocampal activity than “know” responses (Figure 9.7A). Recollection
and familiarity measures can also be estimated from the proportion of
correct and incorrect responses. A study that used this method to assess memory for odors in rats found that selective hippocampal lesions
impaired recollection estimates but not familiarity estimates (Figure
9.7B). Thus, converging lines of evidence from humans and animals link
the hippocampus to recollection rather than familiarity, supporting a
role for this structure in both relational memory and episodic memory.

Differences between medial temporal lobe subregions
An issue of obvious importance is how hippocampal memory functions are
related to the functions of surrounding medial temporal structures, such as the
perirhinal and parahippocampal cortices described in Box 9A. Several ideas
about functional differences between the hippocampus and medial temporal
cortices have been proposed.
According to a two-process theory, the hippocampus processes information
relatively slowly and is relational and spatial, whereas the perirhinal cortex
processes information more rapidly and is item-based. In this conception,
neurons in the hippocampus signal information about spatial positions or associations between items (i.e., recollection), whereas neurons in the perirhinal
cortex signal information about the novelty of individual items (i.e., differences
in familiarity). Consistent with the latter hypothesis, single-cell recordings in
experimental animals have shown that perirhinal neurons do indeed show a
stronger response when an item is first presented than when the same item is
shown again (Figure 9.8A).
Functional neuroimaging studies have also suggested that the hippocampus and the perirhinal cortex make different contributions to recollection
and familiarity. For example, the hippocampus shows a sharp increase in

DECLARATIVE MEMORY
(A)

Stimulus

(B) Posterior hippocampus

Rhinal cortex

1.20

–0.1

■ 291

Spikes/s

First

Spikes/s

fMRI activity (effect size)

Repeat

0.75
–0.6
0.30
–1.1
–0.15
–0.60

Seconds

1
2
3
“Definitely
new”

Figure 9.8 Evidence of functional differences between the perirhinal cortex and
the hippocampus (A) Neurons in the perirhinal cortex show a strong response when
an item is first presented (top panel) but not when the item is repeated (bottom
panel). (B) Functional MRIs show that activity in the hippocampus increases sharply
for items recognized as “definitely old,” whereas activity in rhinal cortex decreases
gradually as items become more familiar. (A after Xiang and Brown 1998; B after
Daselaar et al. 2006.)

activity when participants are sure they have encountered an item before (i.e.,
giving a “definitely old” response on test), consistent with its putative role in
recollection. Activity in perirhinal cortex, by contrast, decreases gradually as
items are regarded as more and more familiar, consistent with a greater role
in familiarity than in recollection (Figure 9.8B). It is unclear, however, whether
the decrease in perirhinal activity measured with fMRI reflects the reduction
in firing rate measured with single-cell recording studies seen in Figure 9.8A.
It is also uncertain how familiarity-related perirhinal reductions pertain to
the repetition suppression mechanisms assumed to mediate priming. Several
authors have suggested that familiarity could be linked to nondeclarative
memory phenomena, such as conceptual priming.
More recently, several researchers have proposed three-process theories that
include not only the hippocampus and the perirhinal cortex, but also the parahippocampal cortex. According to one of these theories, the perirhinal cortex
is concerned with memory for objects, the parahippocampal cortex is involved
in memory for spatial layouts, and the hippocampus integrates the two types of
information and hence is involved in domain-general relational memory (Figure
9.9). Three-process theories have several strengths. They account for evidence
linking the perirhinal cortex to familiarity and the hippocampus to recollection.
In addition, the distinction between perirhinal and parahippocampal functions
fits well with anatomical connectivity, lesion, and functional neuroimaging
evidence. The perirhinal cortex receives most of its visual input from the
ventral (“what”) pathway, and the parahippocampal cortex receives most of its

4

5
6
“Definitely
old”

–1.6

1
2
3
“Definitely
new”

4

5
6
“Definitely
old”

292 ■ CHAPTER 9
Hippocampus
Domain-general relational encoding

A

Hipp

PhC

PrC

Edible

Parahippocampal cortex
Spatial layout encoding

Perirhinal cortex
Object encoding

Sensory analysis

Figure 9.9 A three-process theory of medial temporal lobe functions The
perirhinal cortex (PrC) is concerned with memory for objects; the parahippocampal
cortex (PhC), with memory for spatial layouts; and the hippocampus (Hipp), with
domain-general relational memory. A, amygdala. (After Davachi 2006.)

visual input from the dorsal (“where”) pathway (see Chapter 3). In monkeys,
perirhinal lesions tend to impair object memory rather than spatial memory,
whereas parahippocampal lesions yield the opposite pattern. It is worth noting,
however, that in humans the parahippocampal cortex appears to play a more
general role in context memory and is not limited to spatial memory.

DECLARATIVE MEMORY

In sum, all the major theories of hippocampal function—the cognitive map,
relational memory, and episodic memory theories—are supported by substantial
evidence. One possibility is that all of these theories are correct in some measure and could be integrated. For example, it has been suggested that spatial
memory functions are more pronounced in the right hippocampus, whereas
general relational functions are more the province of the left hippocampus.
Moreover, the relational memory and episodic memory theories are already
closely related, and as noted earlier, both views are consistent with evidence
linking the hippocampus to recollection. Recent three-process theories are
promising and may eventually provide a more integrative theory for the various
medial temporal lobe regions.

Cortical Regions Storing Semantic and Episodic
Memory Representations
As noted earlier in the description of the general model of memory in Figure
9.2, in episodic memory it is generally assumed that different aspects of an
event (visual, auditory, etc.) are stored within the cortical regions specialized
in processing each type of information (visual cortex, auditory cortex, etc.).
A similar assumption is made in semantic memory regarding the storage of
conceptual knowledge. Although cortical storage mechanisms are probably
shared, studies of semantic and episodic memory have typically emphasized
different aspects of these shared mechanisms.
Since studies of semantic memory generally focus on knowledge acquired
before the experiment (e.g., knowing that dogs are mammals), they do not usually
investigate the encoding phase. By contrast, studies of episodic memory generally focus on memories formed in the laboratory, and they tend to investigate
both encoding and retrieval phases. Partly because of this difference, semantic
memory studies tend to focus on differences between cortical storage for different types of knowledge (e.g., animals versus tools), whereas episodic memory
studies tend to focus on whether cortical regions engaged during encoding
are recruited again during retrieval. In other words, semantic memory studies
tend to focus on memory organization, whereas episodic memory studies tend
to focus on memory reactivation.

The organization of semantic knowledge in the cortex
There are two main theories of how semantic knowledge is organized in the
cortex: sensory/functional theory and domain-specific theory. According to
the sensory/functional theory, advanced by neuropsychologists Elizabeth Warrington, Tim Shallice and other researchers, conceptual knowledge is organized
by the sensory (form, color, etc.) and functional (motions, actions, etc.) properties
of real objects. For example, the concept of “ice cream” would be distributed
over visual regions that process associated colors (e.g., red, brown) and shapes
(e.g., cone); the gustatory regions that process associated tastes (e.g., strawberry,
chocolate); and the somatosensory/motor regions that process associated actions
(e.g., licking, cone holding). According to the domain-specific theory, proposed
by neuropsychologist Alfonso Caramazza and collaborators, concepts in the
brain are organized by semantic categories rather than properties. This idea does
not apply to all semantic categories, but only to those assumed to have special
significance for well-being. These include animals, fruits/vegetables, conspecifics, and nonliving things that would have been important during evolution.
The sensory/functional theory, which is an instance of embodied cognition,
is supported by abundant functional neuroimaging evidence that processing

■ 293

294 ■ CHAPTER 9
L

(A)

R

Activations for linguistic
stimuli associated with:
Colors
Actions
Movements
Tastes
Sounds
Emotions

L
R

(B)

(C) Picture-naming performance by category
100
Face words
Arm words
Leg words

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0

Living animate +
nonliving
Fruit/vegetable
+ nonliving
Fruit/vegetable
Living animate
Nonliving
Conspecifics

80

Percent correct

MR signal change (arbitrary units)

0.10

60

40

20

Face

Arm
Leg
Region of interest

0

K.C.

E.W.

R.S.

M.D.
K.S.
Patients

A.P.A.

C.W.

P.L.

Figure 9.10 Representation of semantic knowledge in the brain (A) Locations
of activation, as indicated by functional neuroimaging studies that used linguistic
materials (words, phrases, or sentences) to assess modality-specific knowledge
representation. (B) Brain activity elicited by words associated with motor actions
made with the face (e.g., lick), the arm (e.g., pick), or the leg (e.g., kick) in regions
of interest within primary motor cortex. The regions of interest were identified
with a localizer scan in which participants moved their tongue, hands, or feet.
(C) Examples of patients with domain-specific semantic deficits. Some patients are
disproportionately impaired in knowledge about living things compared to nonliving
things; others have greater deficits with nonliving things or conspecifics. (A from
Binder and Desai 2011; B after Hauk et al. 2004; C after Mahon and Caramazza
2011.)

linguistic stimuli activates brain regions associated with their corresponding
sensory and functional properties. For example, words such as trumpet activate auditory cortex, words such as jump activate motor cortex, words such as
chocolate activate gustatory cortex, and so on (Figure 9.10A). Importantly, these

DECLARATIVE MEMORY

effects can be found not only during tasks that require intentional retrieval
of the objects’ properties, which could elicit visual imagery and top-down
attentional modulation of sensory and motor cortices, but also during passive
reading tasks. For example, passively reading words like lick, pick, and kick
activates, respectively, tongue, finger, and feet areas of primary motor cortex
(Figure 9.10B). These results suggest that the activation of property-related
cortices mediates language comprehension. Evidence that these activations
are not epiphenomenal includes, for example, the finding that motor disorders
(such as Parkinson’s disease) and TMS-based disruption of motor cortex can
produce selective deficits in the comprehension of action verbs.
The domain-specific theory is supported primarily by evidence from braindamaged patients who show disproportionate and even selective impairments for
one semantic category compared to others. Over 100 cases of these category-specific
semantic deficits have been reported. Most of them show impaired knowledge
for living things compared to nonliving things, but the converse pattern and
other selective deficits have also been observed (see examples in Figure 9.10C).
Although the location of the damage in these conditions is variable and somewhat
controversial, animate knowledge deficits are often associated with lesions of the
temporal cortex, and deficits in inanimate knowledge, with frontoparietal damage.
Supporters of the sensory/functional theory have explained the livingnonliving dissociation by arguing that the ability to identify living things
depends more on sensory knowledge (stored in temporal cortices), whereas
the ability to identify nonliving things depends more on functional knowledge (stored in frontoparietal cortices). However, this argument cannot easily
explain why the affected category (e.g., tools) is sometimes impaired in both
sensory and functional knowledge (e.g., both the shape and the actions associated with a hammer), and why semantic deficits for living things may occur
without sensory deficits. In addition, some functional neuroimaging evidence
fits better with the domain-specific theory than with the sensory/functional
theory. Thus, both theories are partly correct, and they need to be integrated
into a more general theory.
Sensory/functional and domain-specific theories are concerned primarily
with the representation of relatively concrete semantic knowledge, such as the
properties of objects. But are there also regions that store abstract semantic
knowledge, like the one required for generalizing and reasoning? For example,
if the knowledge about “ice cream” is stored in the brain regions that process
sweetness and licking, and the knowledge about “potato chips” is stored in the
regions that process saltiness and chewing, where are concepts like “snack”
or “carbohydrate” stored? According to a distributed-only view, there are no
specialized regions for abstract concepts; these concepts are represented by the
same distributed network that mediates concrete sensory/functional features
(Figure 9.11A). According to the distributed-plus-hub view, by contrast, in addition to direct connections among sensory/functional regions, there is a single
“hub” in anterior temporal cortex that stores abstract, amodal representations
for all semantic categories (Figure 9.11B).
The distributed-plus-hub view fits with anatomical evidence that the anterior
temporal lobe is connected to sensory and motor cortices, and is considered a
locus of the caudal-to-rostral convergence of information along the temporal
lobes. The anterior temporal lobe is also proximal to the amygdala and the
orbitofrontal cortex, which could help link semantic knowledge to emotion and
reward. Moreover, the anterior temporal lobe is immediately adjacent to medial
temporal regions that mediate rapid learning of new episodic information, such
as the hippocampus, which could provide the seeds for the acquisition of new
conceptual knowledge.

■ 295

296 ■ CHAPTER 9
(A) Distributed-only veiw

(B) Distributed-plus-hub veiw

Action

Sound

Words

Shape

Color

Motion

(C)

Hub
(D)

Alzheimer’s disease

Percent signal change

Semantic dementia

0.06
0.04
0.02
0

Person

Building

Hammer

Figure 9.11 Abstract semantic knowledge and the anterior temporal lobes
(A) According to a distributed-only view, abstract semantic knowledge is mediated
by the same distributed network that mediates concrete knowledge. (B) According
to the distributed-plus-hub view, abstract semantic knowledge is supported by an
amodal “hub” in the anterior temporal lobes. (C) The brain areas showing reduced
metabolism in semantic dementia are primarily the anterior temporal lobes (left
panel), whereas in Alzheimer’s disease they are primarily the posterior midline and
temporoparietal regions (right panel). (D) In this fMRI study, participants learned facts
about specific people (e.g., Alex works as an insurance agent), specific buildings
(e.g., the Newport Building is used for voter registration), and specific hammers (e.g.,
the Brooks hammer is used to shatter window glass). Activity in anterior temporal
regions (both left and right, but only left is shown) was significantly greater for person
facts than for building or hammer facts.(A–C after Patterson et al. 2007; D after
Simmons et al. 2010.)

The strongest evidence for the idea that the anterior temporal lobe is a semantic
hub is provided by semantic dementia cases. As noted earlier, this variant of
frontotemporal dementia is associated with atrophy of the anterior temporal
lobes and with global semantic knowledge loss. Neuroimaging studies have
confirmed that, unlike forms of dementia involving more widespread damage
such as Alzheimer’s disease, semantic dementia is associated primarily with
anterior temporal lobe dysfunction (Figure 9.11C). Semantic dementia impairs
all kinds of knowledge, regardless of the modality of reception and expression.
A semantic dementia patient who cannot name an object as a “telephone” when

DECLARATIVE MEMORY

shown a photo of one will also fail to identify its sound or to draw a picture
of it. The global nature of this semantic deficit is consistent with the idea of an
amodal, domain-general representational hub in the anterior temporal lobe.
However, the idea that the anterior temporal lobe is a semantic hub has not
received strong support from functional neuroimaging studies. In fact, left
inferior frontal, posterior temporal, and temporoparietal activations are more
frequent in these studies than are anterior temporal activations. It has been
suggested that the scarcity of anterior temporal lobe activation in fMRI studies
reflects a poor signal-to-noise ratio in this region that is due to the proximity to
air-filled sinuses. However, this explanation cannot explain why the fMRI activations found in this area are often associated with social conceptual knowledge,
such as processing famous faces, rather than with knowledge in general. Hub
supporters argue that the social tasks are more sensitive because they require
more specific identification (e.g., recognizing a particular famous person). Yet a
recent fMRI study that compared learning facts about specific people, specific
buildings, and specific hammers found greater anterior temporal activity for
people compared to the other two categories (Figure 9.11D). In sum, although
the idea that the anterior temporal lobe is an abstract knowledge hub fits well
with anatomical and lesion evidence, functional neuroimaging evidence has
often linked the anterior temporal lobes more to social knowledge than to
knowledge in general.

The reactivation of cortical regions for recent episodic memories
According to the memory model described at the beginning of the chapter,
retrieval of recent episodic memories requires access to hippocampal indices,
which in turn lead to the reactivation of cortical memory traces. Let’s consider
the latter first. Relevant evidence for this process has been provided by singlecell recording studies in non-human animals and by functional neuroimaging
studies in humans.
As an example of single-cell recording evidence, one study trained monkeys until they could remember associations between pairs of pictures (e.g.,
between pictures 12 and 12’ in Figure 9.12A). At test, one of the pictures was
presented during the cue period, and after a delay, monkeys had to choose the
associated picture. Many neurons in anterior temporal cortex showed a firing
pattern consistent with reactivation. For example, a neuron that fired selectively
to picture 12 when this picture was presented during the cue period (Figure
9.12B) also fired when picture 12’ was the cue, but in this case the firing occurred
later, during the delay period (Figure 9.12C), consistent with the retrieval of
picture 12’ before the choice period. This type of neuron, which the authors
called “pair-recall neurons,” could be the neurons whose synapses stored the
associations between the pictures.
At a coarser level, functional neuroimaging studies can detect cortical reactivation in humans. In a typical paradigm (Figure 9.13A), participants study
cues (e.g., words) in two different contexts (e.g., words paired with associated
pictures or with associated sounds). At test, the cues are presented without their
contexts (e.g., words alone) while participants make old-versus-new recognition
or context memory decisions. The presence of encoding-related reactivations is
demonstrated by retrieval activity in brain regions associated with the study
contexts (e.g., visual cortex versus auditory cortex), even though these contexts
were not presented during retrieval. Since context-related activity cannot be
attributed to the test cues, it can be reasonably inferred as resulting from reactivation of the encoding context. Reactivation has been demonstrated for a variety
of sensory contexts besides visual and auditory modalities. For example, objects
encoded with odors reactivate piriform cortex during retrieval, and objects
encoded with emotional pictures reactivate the amygdala during retrieval.

■ 297

298 ■ CHAPTER 9
(A)

1

1′

2

2′

3

3′

4

4′

5

5′

6

6′

7

7′

8

8′

9

9′

10

10′

11

11′

12

12′

(B)

Figure 9.12 Reactivation of visually
paired associates in monkeys’
inferior temporal cortex (A) Monkeys
were extensively trained until they
learn to associate the two visual
patterns in each pair. (B,C) At test,
monkeys were presented with one
member of a pair (e.g., 12) and after a
delay they had to distinguish between
the other member of the pair (e.g.,
12ʹ) and a distracter pattern (e.g., 11ʹ).
“Pair-recall” neurons responded more
strongly to one picture (e.g., picture
12) during the cue period (B), as well
as to its associated picture (e.g.,
picture 12ʹ) during the delay period (C),
suggesting that they store the memory
for the newly learned association.
(After Sakai and Miyashita 1991.)

(C)

Spikes/s

50

Spikes/s

50

0

0

Cue

Delay

Choice

Cue

Delay

Choice

Although these examples are all about the reactivation of sensory contexts,
memory theories also predict reactivation of the encoding operations or strategies. In fact, the fundamental memory principle known as transfer-appropriate
processing postulates that memory success is a function of the overlap between
encoding and retrieval operations. A classic behavioral study supporting
this idea found that when participants learned words by focusing either on
semantics (e.g., Is brain a part of the body?) or on phonology (e.g., Does brain
rhyme with train?), the semantic encoding task yielded better performance
in a typical retrieval test emphasizing word meaning (e.g., Did you read the
word brain?), whereas the phonology encoding task yielded better performance
in a retrieval test emphasizing word sound (e.g., Did you read a word that
rhymes with train?). In other words, whether a particular encoding task yields

DECLARATIVE MEMORY
(A)

Train sound

(B) Response to cued picture

“train”

Study

“banjo”

■ 299

Study: Scene
Study: Sentence
Test: Remember scene
Test: Remember sentence
Test: Know

Mean response
(arbitrary units)

Fusiform gyrus
1

0

–1

(C) Response to associated picture

“banjo”

Face estimate

Location estimate

Object estimate

Face recall

Location recall

Object recall

“train”

Study-test match

Test

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

good memory performance depends on how well the cognitive
operations recruited by the encoding task match the operations
engaged by the test.
The concept of transfer-appropriate processing suggests that
retrieval reactivations may reflect not only sensory aspects of the
encoding context, but also the specific strategies used to encode
the stimuli. Consistent with this idea, functional neuroimaging
studies have identified retrieval reactivations that reflect the use
of motor or visual imagery during encoding. As an example of
motor imagery, one study found that when participants learned
action phrases such as “roll the ball,” retrieval activations were
stronger in motor and somatosensory cortices if, rather than covertly
rehearsing the phrase, they imagined themselves performing
the action. As an example of visual imagery reactivations, one
study had participants encode each word either by imagining the

10

20

30

40
50
60
Time (scans)

70

80

90

Figure 9.13 Detecting reactivation during episodic
memory retrieval in humans (A) A typical paradigm
for measuring reactivation activity. Participants study
words paired with pictures or paired with sounds,
and at test, the words are presented alone while
participants make old-versus-new recognition or
context memory decisions. Since the words are
presented alone, differences in retrieval activity as
a function of encoding context are interpreted as
reactivation. (B) A fusiform gyrus region showed
greater activity for scene than for sentence encoding
tasks, and the same region was reactivated during
retrieval, particularly for “remember” responses. (C)
Multivoxel pattern analysis (MVPA) classifiers trained
in distinguishing distributed activation patterns for
faces, locations, and objects showed reactivation
of these patterns before items in the corresponding
categories were recalled. (A after Danker and
Anderson 2010, with brain images from Wheeler et
al. 2000; B after Johnson and Rugg 2007; C after
Polyn et al. 2006.)

300 ■ CHAPTER 9
referent object in a visual scene or by generating a sentence including the word.
In the test phase, only words were presented, and participants made “remember”
(recollection), “know” (familiarity), or “new” responses. As illustrated in Figure
9.13B, the same fusiform region that showed greater activity for scene imagery
than for sentence generation during encoding also showed greater activity for
words encoded in the scene than for words encoded in the sentence task, even
though the test stimuli were identical. This effect was greater for “remember”
than for “know” responses, suggesting that the reactivation of encoding details
contributes to the experience of recollection.
Whereas the foregoing reactivations were detected in the overall amount of
activity within a certain brain region, the recapitulation of encoding contexts
or operations can also be observed in the distributed pattern of retrieval activations. The reactivation of distributed activation patterns has been investigated
using multivoxel pattern analysis (MVPA; see Chapter 2). For example, a study
that trained an MVPA classifier to distinguish among activation patterns for
faces (e.g., Jack Nicholson), locations (e.g., the Taj Mahal), and objects (e.g., a
tree) identified the reactivation of these distributed patterns during retrieval
just before participants recalled the names of faces, locations, or objects (Figure
9.13C). In other words, distributed activation patterns predicted the types of
stimuli participants were about to recall. MVPA studies have also been applied
to item recognition and source memory tasks.
In addition to involving the reactivation of cortical memory traces, the model
in Figure 9.2 assumes that for nonconsolidated memories, retrieval entails the
reactivation of hippocampal indices. Hippocampal reactivation has also been
investigated using MVPA. In one study, for example, participants repeatedly
viewed short video clips of three distinct everyday events (e.g., taking a drink
from a disposable coffee cup and throwing the cup into a trash can). Then,
while in the MRI scanner, they recalled the movie clips with their eyes closed.
MVPA classifiers were trained on half of the imaging data during recall and
were then applied to the other half. Using only activation patterns within the
hippocampus, the classifiers were able to successfully identify the particular
video clip being recalled by individual participants.

Contributions of the Prefrontal Cortex to Encoding
and Retrieval
Evidence for the role of prefrontal regions during memory encoding and retrieval phases comes from both neuroimaging and patient studies. Functional
neuroimaging has the advantage of providing independent measures of brain
activity during encoding and retrieval. In contrast, evidence from brain-damaged patients cannot easily distinguish between these two memory phases;
when damage of a certain brain region, such as the prefrontal cortex, impairs
memory performance, it is unclear whether this impairment reflects an encoding deficit, a retrieval deficit, or both. On the other hand, patient studies
provide information about whether a certain region is actually necessary for
memory performance.

Functional neuroimaging of episodic encoding
A powerful way to isolate the neural correlates of episodic encoding is the subsequent memory paradigm. This method, described in Box 9B, involves comparing
encoding-phase activity for items that are remembered versus those forgotten in
a subsequent memory test. As Figure 9.14A illustrates, the left inferior frontal
gyrus tends to show greater encoding activity for words that are subsequently
remembered than for words forgotten. These differences in activity, known as

DECLARATIVE MEMORY
(A)

(B)

Semantic versus baseline

4
Remembered
Forgotten

Activity level

3
2
1

Phonological versus baseline
0
–1
0

4

8

12

Time (s)

Figure 9.14 Subsequent memory effects and semantic processing in the left
inferior frontal gyrus (A) Greater encoding activity is seen in the left inferior frontal
gyrus for words that were subsequently remembered than for words subsequently
forgotten. This difference is known as a subsequent memory effect (SME). (B)
Evidence that the anterior part of the left inferior frontal gyrus is associated with
semantic processing. This region was activated when participants attended to
meaningful associations among semantically related words (e.g., tiger, circus, jungle)
but not when they attended to sound associations between phonologically related
words (e.g., skill, fill, hill). (A after Paller and Wagner 2002; B from McDermott et al.
2003.)

subsequent memory effects (SMEs), are also typically found in medial temporal
lobe and dorsal parietal lobe regions. In general, SMEs in the inferior frontal
gyrus tended to occur in the left hemisphere for verbal stimuli and bilaterally
for visual stimuli.
The results of language studies suggest that SMEs in the anterior part of
the left inferior frontal gyrus are likely to reflect enhanced semantic processing, whereas SMEs in the posterior part are more likely to reflect phonological
processing. The posterior part includes the region known as Broca’s area, and
damage to this region is associated with a deficiency called production aphasia
(see Chapter 12). The dissociation between semantic and phonological processing in anterior compared to posterior parts of the left inferior frontal gyrus has
been confirmed by several fMRI studies (Figure 9.14B).

■ 301

302 ■ CHAPTER 9

■ BOX 9B FUNCTIONAL NEUROIMAGING METHODS TO STUDY
EPISODIC MEMORY

A

s described in Chapter 2, functional neuroimaging provides a
powerful method to investigate the
neural correlates of cognitive functions.
With respect to episodic memory, these
methods are especially useful in that they
can distinguish between encoding and
retrieval. In studies of brain-damaged
patients who are impaired in episodic
memory, it is difficult or impossible to
know whether the impairment reflects
encoding deficits, retrieval deficits, or
both. Functional neuroimaging studies of
normal subjects, however, have identified
differences in the involvement of several
brain regions in encoding versus retrieval.

(A)

a

In working to isolate activity specifically associated with successful encoding
or retrieval operations, the event-related
potential (ERP) designs described in
Chapter 2 are well suited to this purpose
because they allow a direct comparison
between successful and unsuccessful
trials during encoding and/or retrieval.
When applied to encoding, this method
is known as the subsequent memory
paradigm and involves four steps
(Figure A).
In Step 1, participants study a series
of items (a,b,c…) while their brain activity is recorded. Step 2 requires that they
perform encoding trials, remembering

some of the studied items and forgetting
others. On the basis of retrieval performance, in Step 3 the encoding trials are
coded as subsequently remembered or
subsequently forgotten; activity during these two types of encoding trials
is compared in Step 4. Greater activity
for subsequently remembered than for
forgotten trials, assumed to reflect successful encoding processes, is known as
subsequent memory effects (SMEs).
The subsequent memory paradigm
has been used in ERP studies since the
early 1980s by cognitive neuroscientist
Kenneth Paller and other researchers. In
ERP studies, SMEs tend to be seen over

ENCODING
1
b

c

d

e

RETRIEVAL
2
f

g

h

a

b

c

d

e

f

g

h

3
a

b

c

d

e

Subsequently
remembered

f

g

h

Subsequently
forgotten

Remembered
(hits)

4

Forgotten
(misses)

*

(A) A method for comparing successful and
unsuccessful trials during encoding and
retrieval. (B) Example of SMEs using an ERP
paradigm. Compared to later-forgotten faces,
later-remembered faces elicited greater positivity in frontal and parietal electrodes starting
at about 300 milliseconds. μV, microvolts.
(From Guo et al. 2005.)

(B)

200–400 ms

–2

400–600 ms

μV

600–800 ms

2

DECLARATIVE MEMORY

■ 303

■ BOX 9B (continued)
frontoparietal scalp regions. Although the
neural generators of scalp ERPs are uncertain, this method has the advantage
of providing fine temporal resolution. As
an example, Figure B, which shows that
ERPs for later-remembered and forgotten faces start to diverge around 300
milliseconds after stimulus onset—a
distinction that persists until about 800
milliseconds. This time window provides
a useful limit on speculation about the
cognitive processes supporting successful face encoding.
As illustrated by the right-hand panel
in Figure A, successful versus unsuccessful trials (i.e., hits versus misses) can
also be compared during retrieval. An

alternative approach to isolating activity associated with retrieval success is
to compare hits to correct rejections of
new items. An important advantage of
the hit-versus-miss contrast is that the
same sets of items are compared as
in the subsequent memory paradigm
(e.g., a,b,e,h versus c,d,f,g in Figure A).
An advantage of the hit-versus-correctrejection comparison is that it is based
on correct responses, and hence not
contaminated with error production and
detection processes. A problem of using correct rejections as the baseline,
however, is that new items elicit novelty
detection processes that may contaminate retrieval-related activations.

SMEs are usually found in the inferior frontal gyrus (ventrolateral prefrontal cortex; Figure 9.15A), but rarely in the middle frontal gyrus (dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex). This pattern may reflect the simple nature of the stimuli
commonly used in SME studies (e.g., unrelated words), which do not typically
require the organizing functions attributed to dorsolateral prefrontal regions
(see Chapter 13). To investigate this idea, participants can be scanned while
they are reordering or rehearsing words in working memory. The participants
are later tested outside the scanner for memory of the learned words. The left
dorsolateral prefrontal region in this study showed a significant SME (Figure
9.15B), but only for the reorder condition (Figure 9.15C). This finding suggests that the dorsolateral prefrontal region contributes to successful episodic
encoding through its role in organizing or manipulating information within
working memory.

Functional neuroimaging of episodic retrieval
Consider trying to remember what you had for breakfast the day before yesterday. Your train of thought might go something like this:
Hmm … the day before yesterday I had a class in the morning and I
didn’t have much time for breakfast. I had something in the kitchen. I
made coffee, which I always have in the morning, and I probably made
some eggs … No, I didn’t have eggs because I was in a hurry … Now, I
remember! I grabbed a slice of bread and ate it while walking out of the
apartment.

This example illustrates typical components of episodic memory retrieval. A
retrieval cue (the question about breakfast) triggers a memory search that narrows the focus to a particular time and place (the day before yesterday, in the
kitchen), which leads to the recovery of increasingly specific stored memory
traces (grabbing a slice of bread, eating it while walking). Descriptively at
least, the information recovered is evaluated by a monitoring process that can
reject inappropriate memories (e.g., eggs), leading to further refinement. While
these different processes are taking place, a hypothetical mental state known
as retrieval mode is assumed to keep continuous attentional focus on the past

References
BUCKNER, R. L. AND M. E. WHEELER (2001)
The cognitive neuroscience of remembering. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2: 624–634.
GUO, C., J. L. VOSS AND K. A. PALLER (2005)
Electrophysiological correlates of forming
memories for faces, names, and face–name
associations. Brain Res. Cogn. Brain Res. 22:
153–164.
PALLER, K. A. AND A. D. WAGNER (2002)
Observing the transformation of experience into memory. Trends Cogn. Sci. 6:
93–102.

304 ■ CHAPTER 9
(A)

(C)
0.7
High subsequent memory
Low subsequent memory
High subsequent memory
Low subsequent memory

0.6
0.5

Reorder
Rehearse

(B)

Signal change (%)

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
–0.1
–0.2
Cue
0

2

4

6

Delay
8

10

12

14
16
Time (s)

Probe
18

20

22

24

26

28

Figure 9.15 SMEs in the inferior versus middle frontal gyri (A) SMEs are
typically found in the left inferior frontal gyrus (green dots) but rarely in the middle
frontal gyrus (red dots). (B) However, when the encoding task requires organizing
information within working memory, the middle frontal gyrus (shown in red) shows a
robust SME. (C) This region showed a significant SME during the delay period of a
working memory task when participants reordered words during this period but not
when they just rehearsed them. (After Blumenfeld and Ranganath 2006.)

events in question. All these processes tend to operate very fast, and we are
usually unaware of their operations. In the laboratory, however, the cognitive
and neural mechanisms of these processes can be investigated by measuring
the effects of experimental variables on various episodic memory tests.
Episodic memory tests include item recognition, recall, and source memory
tests. In a typical item recognition test, participants are presented with items
(e.g., words) previously encountered in the laboratory (old) intermixed with
items never encountered in the context of the laboratory (new), and they are
asked to classify each item as either “old” or “new”. Correct responses include
responding “old” to an old item (hit) and responding “new” to a new item (correct rejection); incorrect responses include responding “old” to a new item (false
alarm) and responding “new” to an old item (miss; Table 9.1).
In a recall test, the target information is not provided by the experimenter
and must be generated by the participant in response to contextual information,
which is broad in a free-recall test (“Recall the words you read at the beginning
of the experiment”) or item-specific in a cued-recall test (“Recall the word that
was paired with the word house”).
In a source (or context) memory test, participants are
TABLE 9.1 Four Recognition Memory Outcomes
provided with items and must retrieve the spatial, sensory, or semantic context associated with the item during
RESPONSE
encoding (e.g., “Was the word house presented on the left
or the right side of the screen?”).
“OLD”
“NEW”
ITEM CLASSIFICATION
One variable often measured or manipulated by funcOld
Hit
Miss
tional neuroimaging researchers is the amount of informaNew
False alarm
Correct rejection
tion successfully retrieved. Since this amount is assumed

DECLARATIVE MEMORY
(A)

Encoding

Retrieval

Encoding versus retrieval

■ 305

(B)

MFG
IFG

fMRI activity (effect size)

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
–0.2
–0.4
–0.6

PPC
PMR
(C)

Signal change (%)

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
–0.1

High control
Low control

–0.2
–0.3
9.4

56.6

103.8

151.0
198.2
Time (s)

245.4

292.6

to be greater for hits than for correct rejections, regions showing greater activity
for hits than for correct rejections are presumed to be involved in recovering
memories and/or holding recovered information within working memory.
These regions typically include left inferior and left middle frontal gyri, as
well as the posterior parietal and posterior midline regions considered in the
next section (Figure 9.16A). These regions are also associated with successful
retrieval during source memory tasks. Activations in the left middle frontal
gyrus tend to be more frequent during retrieval than during encoding, possibly
reflecting greater demands of working memory manipulation during memory
search. Conversely, activations in the anterior left inferior frontal gyrus tend to
be more pronounced during encoding than during retrieval, possibly reflecting
greater semantic processing contributions during encoding.
Another variable often measured in functional neuroimaging studies of
episodic retrieval is confidence. In general, “old” responses made with high
confidence are assumed to involve greater information recovery than those
made with low confidence. Conversely, monitoring processes are assumed to
be more demanding for low-confidence than for high-confidence responses.
Using this logic, fMRI studies have linked monitoring processes to activity in

Low

Medium
High
Recognition confidence

Figure 9.16 Frontal regions
associated with episodic retrieval
processes (A) Meta-analysis showing
brain regions frequently activated
during successful encoding (SMEs)
and retrieval (hits minus correct
rejections). Whereas the left inferior
frontal gyrus (IFG) is more frequently
activated during encoding, the left
middle frontal gyrus (MFG) and the
posterior parietal cortex (PPC) are
more frequently activated during
retrieval. PMR, posterior midline
region. (B) This study showed right
dorsolateral prefrontal activity to
be greater for low-confidence than
for high-confidence recognition
responses, possibly reflecting
monitoring. (C) The right frontopolar
cortex showed sustained activity
during an episodic retrieval task,
possibly reflecting retrieval mode.
Dashed lines indicate average activity
and show differences during the
block (gray bars) but not during the
interblock intervals. (A from Spaniol et
al. 2009; B after Fleck et al. 2006; C
after Velanova et al. 2003.)

306 ■ CHAPTER 9
right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, which tends to show greater activity for
low-confidence than for high-confidence recognition decisions (Figure 9.16B). It
is worth mentioning, however, that the same region also shows greater activity
for low-confidence than for high-confidence perceptual decisions, suggesting
that this region mediates monitoring processes that are shared by episodic
retrieval and other cognitive functions.
Finally, retrieval processes also differ in their temporal characteristics. In a
typical episodic retrieval test that includes several items from the same past event
(e.g., a study list), memory recovery and monitoring processes are assumed to
vary from trial to trial, and to dissipate during the intertrial interval. Retrieval
mode, however, is assumed be sustained throughout the task, including the
interval between the trials. One way of distinguishing sustained from transient
activations is to use the hybrid block/event-related designs described in Chapter
2. For example, a hybrid fMRI study found that the right anterior prefrontal
cortex showed sustained activity during episodic retrieval (Figure 9.16C),
thereby linking this region to retrieval mode, rather than to more transient
event-related processes.

Effects of frontal lobe lesions
Whereas medial temporal lobe lesions are associated with a devastating amnesia
syndrome, frontal lobe lesions typically cause only mild declarative memory
deficits, and only in certain tasks. In general, the effects of frontal damage on
declarative memory appear to be a function of the strategic demands of the
task. Recall and source memory tests, which depend more on strategic control
processes, tend to be more affected by frontal lesions than recognition memory
tests are. For example, in one study patients with frontal lobe damage, agematched controls, and younger controls were presented a series of facts that
previous testing indicated they had not known prior to the study. After a delay,
participants performed recognition and source memory tests for the facts. In
the source memory test, they had to indicate whether they had learned the fact
during the experiment or had known it all along (the latter being an “incorrect” answer). Although the three groups performed at about the same level in
recognition, frontally damaged patients made many more errors in identifying
the source of the memories than did the two control groups (Figure 9.17A).
Source memory deficits in frontal lobe patients may reflect impairments
in encoding processes, such as semantic processing and working memory
manipulation, and/or impairments in retrieval processes, such as organizing
the memory search and monitoring retrieved information. Functional neuroimaging evidence can be used to predict which processes will be more affected
depending on the location of the lesion. For example, given that fMRI studies
have linked monitoring processes to the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(see Figure 9.16B), damage to this region should lead to a monitoring failure.
Consistent with this idea, cognitive neuroscientist Daniel Schacter and colleagues
reported a patient (B.G.) with a large right dorsolateral prefrontal lesion who
showed a severe deficit in rejecting new items. As illustrated in Figure 9.17B,
B.G. produced an abnormally high proportion of “old” responses to nonstudied
items (false alarms), many of which he classified as remembered rather than
known. Control participants very rarely classify false alarms as remembered.
This sort of impairment suggests a monitoring deficit.
Although dorsolateral prefrontal lesions may lead to increased false alarms in
laboratory memory tasks, they are not typically associated with false memories
for complex autobiographical events, or confabulations. Patients suffering from
confabulation report personal events that never happened. Confabulations may
be spontaneous, generated by the patient without any apparent prompting; or
provoked, generated in response to direct questions. Sometimes confabulations

(A)

Recall
of facts

100

Recognition
of facts

40

90
30

70
Source error (%)

Correct response (%)

80

60
50
40
30

20

10

20
10
0

0
F

O

Y

F

O

Y

DECLARATIVE MEMORY

Overall
source errors

F

O

Y

Figure 9.17 Recall, recognition, and source
memory in patients with frontal lobe damage
(A) Patients with frontal lobe damage (F) were
compared with age-matched controls (O) and
with younger control subjects (Y). Performance
on recognition memory was similar across
all three groups, but source memory was
significantly impaired in patients with frontal
lobe damage. (B) Patient B.G., who has a large
lesion of the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex,
is impaired in memory monitoring. He showed a
very high false-alarm rate for nonstudied words,
many of which he classified as remembered
rather than known. (C) Overlapping lesions in
a group of confabulating patients. The colors
represent the number of patients with lesions
that overlap, ranging from one patient (purple) to
all patients (red). (A after Janowsky et al. 1989;
B after Schacter et al. 1996; C from Gilboa et al.
2006.)

(B)

Proportion of “old” responses

1.0
B.G.
Controls
0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

Known

Remembered Remembered
and known
Not studied

Known

■ 307

Remembered Remembered
and known
Studied

(C)

involve misplacing an event in time and/or place, such as the case of a patient
who remembered an imaginary trip abroad to visit a relative when the meeting
with the relative actually occurred while the patient was in the hospital. Other
times confabulations can be fantastic, such as the case of a patient who claimed
that his father had been abducted by aliens over the weekend. This bizarre
confabulation was apparently a blend of two different memories: (1) the father

308 ■ CHAPTER 9

Figure 9.18 Gross anatomy of
posterior parietal cortex Posterior
parietal cortex (PPC) consists of
the parietal regions posterior to
the somatosensory cortex and can
be divided into dorsal and ventral
components. Dorsal PPC includes
the intraparietal sulcus (IPS) and the
superior parietal lobule, which extends
medially into the precuneus region.
Ventral parietal cortex consists of the
angular gyrus and the supramarginal
gyrus, which includes the area known
as the temporoparietal junction (TPJ).

missed his usual weekend visit, and (2) in a previous visit he had brought toy
aliens for the patient’s children.
Confabulation is a sign found in numerous disorders, including schizophrenia, Korsakoff’s syndrome (dementia arising from severe alcoholism),
other dementias, and aneurysms of the anterior communicating artery. In
brain-damaged patients, spontaneous confabulation has been associated with
lesions in ventromedial prefrontal and orbitofrontal regions (Figure 9.17C). It
is unclear whether confabulations reflect difficulty in discriminating between
internally and externally generated representations, confusion about temporal
order, deficits in strategic retrieval processes, or a combination of these problems.
In sum, episodic memory encoding and retrieval have been associated with
activations in specific prefrontal regions and with patients that have frontal
damage deficits in some episodic retrieval tests. During episodic encoding,
subsequent memory effects (SMEs) are typically found in the left inferior frontal
gyrus for verbal stimuli and bilaterally for pictorial stimuli. The anterior part
of the left inferior frontal gyrus has been associated with semantic processing;
the posterior part, with phonological processing. Dorsolateral prefrontal regions
may also show SMEs when stimuli are more complex and require organization
of the information in working memory to facilitate subsequent memory retrieval.
Episodic retrieval involves a variety of processes, including memory search,
monitoring, and retrieval. Successful memory recovery has been associated
with left dorsolateral prefrontal regions; monitoring, with right dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex; and retrieval, with frontopolar cortex. Damage to prefrontal
regions produces larger impairments on strategic memory tests, such as recall
and source memory tests, than on simple recognition tests. Damage to the right
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex has been linked to deficits in monitoring and
increased false alarms. Damage to the ventromedial and orbitofrontal regions
may sometimes lead to a dramatic tendency toward confabulations. Taken
together with functional neuroimaging results, these findings are generally
consistent with the assumption that the prefrontal cortex contributes semantic
and executive control processes to encoding and retrieval. Prefrontal regions
operate in tight connection with parietal regions, which are also thought to play
an important role in declarative memory, as reviewed in the following section.

Superior
parietal lobule
I n tr

a p arietal sulcus

Supramarginal
gyrus
TPJ
Angular
gyrus

Dorsal PPC
Ventral PPC

Contributions of the Posterior Parietal
Cortex to Encoding and Retrieval
Although the parietal cortex is not a region traditionally associated with memory, recent evidence suggests it plays an
important role in declarative memory, both during retrieval
and during encoding.

The role of posterior parietal cortex during retrieval
The role of posterior parietal cortex during episodic memory
retrieval was first detected by ERP studies of recognition, which
consistently showed a parietal positivity that is greater for hits
than for correct rejections at about 400 to 800 milliseconds after
the stimulus (Box 9C). Event-related fMRI studies later confirmed
the parietal origin of these effects and showed that activation
patterns differ for dorsal and ventral parietal cortex (the anatomy
is illustrated in Figure 9.18). As Figure 9.19A shows, activations
associated with familiarity and low-confidence recognition are
more frequent in dorsal parietal cortex, whereas activations
associated with recollection and high-confidence recognition
trials are more frequent in ventral parietal cortex.

DECLARATIVE MEMORY

■ 309

■ BOX 9C ERP STUDIES OF EPISODIC RETRIEVAL

S

tudies of episodic memory retrieval using event-related potentials
have identified three consistent
differences between recalling old and
new items. First, about 300 to 500 milliseconds after a stimulus is presented,
new items tend to elicit greater negative voltage over midfrontal regions than
do old items. This frontal negativity (FN)
effect has been called the FN400 effect
to distinguish it from the central parietal
N400 effect typically associated with
semantic processing. The FN400 effect
responds similarly to studied items and
to new items that appear familiar, and
to both deeply and shallowly encoded
items (Figure A). Because of these and
other findings, the FN400 effect has
been attributed to familiarity.
Second, 400 to 800 milliseconds after
the stimulus, old items tend to elicit more
positive voltage over parietal electrodes
than new items do. This effect is typically
left-lateralized for verbal materials, and
it is known as the left parietal effect.
This phenomenon tends to be more
pronounced when higher (more complex)
levels of recollection are required. For example, the effect tends to be greater for
deeply encoded items than for shallowly
encoded items (Figure B); for words
judged as “remembered” rather than
“known”; and for words accompanied
by successful rather than unsuccessful
source retrieval. The source of the left
parietal effect is most likely the left posterior parietal region, since it is typically
activated during PET and fMRI studies of
episodic retrieval and is strongly associated with retrieval success.
Finally, at 600 to 1200 milliseconds
poststimulus, old items sometimes elicit a
more positive response over right frontal
regions than do new items; this is known
as the right frontal effect. The right fron-

(B)

(A)
Shallow hit – Shallow miss

Deep hit – Shallow hit

+

+

RF

LP

Left parietal
effect

FN400 effect
0

600
Time (ms)

0

ERP waveforms during recognition of new words and words
studied under deep or shallow encoding conditions. (A) The
FN400 effect associated with familiarity (deep = shallow).
(B) The left parietal effect associated with recollection (deep
> shallow). RF, right frontal electrode; LP, left parietal electrode. μV, microvolts. (From Rugg and Yonelinas 2003.)

600
Time (ms)
+
5 μV

New
Shallow hit
Deep hit

tal effect is usually apparent during tasks
that entail demanding source memory
decisions and is assumed to reflect
postretrieval operations. This idea fits the
extended time course of the right frontal
effect, and it is consistent with functional
neuroimaging and lesion evidence linking
the right prefrontal cortex to monitoring.

Memory: A Neurocognitive Approach, H. D.
Zimmer, A. Mecklinger and U. Lindenberger (eds.). Oxford: Oxford University
Press, pp. 467–492.

References

RUGG, M. D. AND A. P. YONELINAS (2003)
Human recognition memory: A cognitive
neuroscience perspective. Trends Cogn. Sci.
7: 313–319.

CURRAN, T., K. L. TEPE AND C. PIATT (2006)
ERP explorations of dual processes in
recognition memory. In Binding in Human

To explain this dissociation, one theory, known as the attention to memory
(AtoM) model and proposed by cognitive neuroscientists Roberto Cabeza, Elisa
Ciaramelli, and Morris Moscovitch, extends the distinction between ventral and
dorsal attention systems (see Chapter 7) to memory. This theory postulates that
the dorsal parietal cortex mediates top-down attention processes, which are
required by demanding memory search and monitoring operations, whereas
ventral parietal cortex mediates bottom-up attention processes, which are captured by salient memories or retrieval cues. The AtoM theory explains dorsal
parietal activations for familiarity and low-confidence recognition trials, which
involve greater memory search and monitoring; and ventral parietal activations for recollection and high-confidence recognition trials, which involve the

RUGG, M. D. (2004) Retrieval processing in
human memory: Electrophysiological and
fMRI evidence. In The Cognitive Neurosciences, 3rd Ed., M. S. Gazzaniga (ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 727–737.

310 ■ CHAPTER 9
(B) Encoding

(A) Retrieval

Familiarity
Low-confidence
recognition

Positive SME

Recollection
High-confidence
recognition
(C)

Figure 9.19 Posterior parietal activations during
episodic retrieval and encoding (A) Meta-analysis
showing that retrieval activations associated with
recollection and high-confidence recognition are
more frequent in ventral parietal cortex, whereas
activations associated with familiarity and lowconfidence recognition are more frequent in dorsal
parietal cortex. (B) Meta-analysis showing that positive
SMEs (remembered > forgotten) are more frequent
in dorsal parietal cortex, whereas negative SMEs
(forgotten > remembered) are more frequent in ventral
parietal cortex. (C) Across five different studies, the
same ventral parietal regions that showed a negative
SME (forgotten > remembered) during encoding also
showed success-related activity (remembered >
forgotten) during retrieval—a pattern called encodingretrieval flip. (A after Cabeza et al. 2008; B after
Uncapher and Wagner 2009; C after Daselaar et al.
2009.)

Encoding
Left

Negative SME

Retrieval
Right

Experiment 1: Faces

6
4
2
0
–2
–4
–6

6
4
2
0
–2
–4
–6

Remembered – Forgotten

Experiment 2: Scenes
5

4

3

2

1
0
–1

0

–3

–2

–5

–4

0.5

Experiment 3: Word pairs

0.3
0.1
0
–0.1

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
–0.1
–0.2
–0.3

–0.3
Experiment 4: Single words
1.4

2.7
1.7

0.4
0

0.7
0
–0.3

–0.6

–1.3

–1.6

–2.3
Experiment 5: Single words

5
3
1
0
–1
–3

3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4

DECLARATIVE MEMORY

recovery of salient episodic details. An alternative theory of ventral parietal
cortex function, known as the episodic buffer hypothesis, proposes that this region
mediates the maintenance of recovered multisensory episodic memories within
working memory.
Thorough neuropsychological assessment of patients with ventral parietal
lesions revealed subtle memory deficits. One study found that when these patients were asked to describe autobiographical memories, they produced fewer
episodic details than did controls. However, when specific questions about
these details were posed, the patients were able to generate the missing details.
This finding suggests that the episodic details were available but not spontaneously attended. Likewise, another study found that in the “remember”/“know”
paradigm, ventral parietal patients produced fewer “remember” responses; but
when tested in a source memory task in which episodic details were specifically tested, they performed as well as controls did. Again, episodic details
apparently were available but were not spontaneously attended. The finding
that ventral parietal lesions impair not memory retrieval per se, but only the
ability to spontaneously attend to the retrieval output, fits well with the AtoM
model. However, an important challenge for any theory of parietal contributions to declarative memory is to explain not only retrieval findings but also
encoding findings.

The role of posterior parietal cortex during encoding
As during retrieval, dorsal and ventral parietal regions show very different
activation patterns during encoding. In fact, the dorsal-ventral dissociation is
even more dramatic during encoding (Figure 9.19B); whereas dorsal parietal
regions show greater activity for subsequently remembered than for forgotten
trials (positive SMEs), ventral parietal regions show the reverse effect: greater
activity for subsequently forgotten than remembered items (negative SMEs).
Thus, the same ventral parietal regions that are associated with retrieval success (recollection, high-confidence recognition) are associated with encoding
failure (subsequent forgetting). A study that compared activity for remembered
versus forgotten trials during encoding and during retrieval in five experiments using different stimuli confirmed that the same ventral parietal regions
that showed negative SMEs during encoding (subsequently forgotten greater
than subsequently remembered) also showed success effects during retrieval
(remembered more than forgotten; Figure 9.19C).
A possible explanation of this “encoding-retrieval flip” is provided by the
attention to memory model’s assumption that the ventral parietal cortex mediates bottom-up attention. During retrieval, bottom-up attention is associated
with memory success because it reflects the capture of attention by recovered
memories. During encoding, by contrast, information to be learned is the focus
of top-down attention, and bottom-up attention is more likely to reflect attention
shifts to unrelated environmental stimuli or spontaneous thoughts, away from
the items that are meant to be encoded. For this reason, bottom-up attention
during encoding is more likely to reflect distraction and to be associated with
encoding failure. These ideas, however, remain highly speculative.
In sum, posterior parietal regions play a role in episodic memory retrieval and
encoding. During retrieval, dorsal parietal cortex is associated with familiarity
and low-confidence recognition, whereas ventral parietal cortex is associated
with recollection and high-confidence recognition. One possible explanation of
this pattern is that, similar to what happens during perception, dorsal parietal
cortex is involved in top-down attention and ventral parietal cortex is involved
in bottom-up attention. Consistent with a role in bottom-up attention, damage
to ventral parietal cortex impairs not the ability to retrieve episodic details, but
only the ability to spontaneously report these details. During encoding, dorsal

■ 311

312 ■ CHAPTER 9
parietal regions are associated with encoding success (positive SME), whereas
ventral parietal regions are associated with encoding failure (negative SME).
Thus, ventral parietal regions are associated with retrieval success and with
encoding failure. The reasons for this encoding-retrieval flip are still unknown.

Memory Consolidation
The term consolidation (from the Latin for “to make firm”) refers to the progressive
stabilization of long-term memory that follows the initial encoding of memory
traces. The discussion that follows distinguishes between synaptic and system
consolidation, describes theories of system consolidation, considers the roles
of the hippocampus and the cortex as complementary learning systems, and
reviews evidence of consolidation during sleep.

Synaptic versus system consolidation
Consolidation occurs at both cellular and system levels, known respectively as
synaptic consolidation and system consolidation. Synaptic consolidation is accomplished within a few minutes to hours after encoding. It involves changes in
gene expression, protein synthesis, and other mechanisms of synaptic plasticity
that allow the persistence of memory traces at the cellular level (see Chapter 8).
In vertebrate animal models, synaptic consolidation occurs in regions of the
brain pertinent to long-term memory storage. One way of disrupting synaptic
consolidation is to administer protein synthesis inhibitors. These drugs block longterm synaptic changes but do not impair the perceptual and motor processes
required for task performance. In Figure 9.20A, for example, protein-synthesis
inhibitors disrupted nondeclarative memory when administered during the
first hour after training but not thereafter, indicating that synaptic consolidation was completed within this time. Similar synaptic consolidation processes
presumably apply to all memory systems.
In contrast, the phrase system consolidation has been applied to changes in
neural connectivity that can take days, months, or even years, and it involves
a change in the brain regions supporting certain types of memory. System
consolidation is said to occur when a particular brain region that was necessary
for post-encoding memory performance is no longer required, or when it can be
demonstrated that another brain region is now needed to preserve the memory.
Although system consolidation involves changes at cellular and molecular levels,
the term emphasizes a description at the system level—namely, a change in
relative contributions of different brain regions. System consolidation applies
to both declarative and nondeclarative memory and can be observed even in
invertebrates, but typically the term is used to describe changes in the role of
the medial temporal lobe regions in declarative memory.

(A) Synaptic
100

(B) System

Consolidated memory (%)

Figure 9.20 Synaptic and system
consolidation show different time
courses (A) Synaptic consolidation
was demonstrated in this example
by administering a protein synthesis
inhibitor to goldfish at different times
following learning. Sensitivity to the
drug lasted about an hour. (B) System
consolidation was demonstrated here
by damaging the hippocampus of rats
at different times following contextual
fear conditioning. Sensitivity to the
lesion lasts about a month. (After
Dudai 2004; data in A from Agranoff
et al. 1966; data in B from Kim and
Fanselow 1992.)

0

0

30

60
Minutes

90

1

7

14
21
Days

28

DECLARATIVE MEMORY

■ 313

System consolidation was first described in 1982 by the French psychologist Théodule-Armand Ribot, who noted that memory loss following brain
damage affects recent memories to a greater extent than remote memories; this
temporal gradient became known as Ribot’s law. Indeed, the medial temporal
lobe amnesia displayed by H.M. and similar patients shows such a temporal
gradient. Studies on human patients are limited, however, because the locations
of the lesions cannot be controlled and the assessment of memory must rely
on retrospective measures, such as memory for news events and the like. By
contrast, in animal studies it is possible to selectively damage a region that is
assumed to be critical for system consolidation at different times after encoding.
For example, hippocampal lesions in rats impaired declarative memory during
the first month after encoding but not thereafter (Figure 9.20B). Although in this
example system consolidation occurred within a month, temporal gradients in
amnesia patients suggest that some forms of system consolidation in humans
may take years.

Theories of system consolidation in declarative memory
There are two main theories of system consolidation: standard consolidation
theory and multiple-trace theory. The standard consolidation theory was introduced earlier, in the description of the basic neurological memory model in
Figure 9.2. As previously noted, the standard assumption is that in the case of
recent events, the various cortical memories for one event (e.g., the color of the
balloons, the sound of the music, and action of dancing at a birthday party)
are disconnected from each other, and hence they can be reactivated together
only via the indices stored in the hippocampus (see retrieval of recent memory
in Figure 9.2C). In the case of remote memories, by contrast, repeated reactivation of the cortical traces in the time since the original forming of the memory
presumably leads to the establishment of direct connections between the distributed cortical traces. As a result, cortical traces for remote memories can be
reactivated as a unit, independently of the medial temporal lobes (see retrieval
of remote memory in Figure 9.2C).
This point is further illustrated in Figure 9.21: before consolidation, the
connections between the hippocampus and cortical units are essential for
reactivation; after consolidation, direct connections are established among the
cortical units, and the cortical-hippocampal connections become less critical
for retrieval. This hypothetical consolidation process is sometimes described
as a “transfer” of memories from the hippocampus to the cortex, but, as illustrated in Figure 9.21, memories are not really transferred; what is transferred,
or expanded, is the ability to enact the reactivation process.
In 1997, Lynn Nadel and Morris Moscovitch pointed out problems with this
standard consolidation theory. One problem they noted is that in some patients

Cortex

Necessary connection
Unnecessary connection

Hippocampus
Time

Figure 9.21 The standard model of
declarative system consolidation
As time passes and memories are
repeatedly reactivated, direct associations are formed among cortical
units, and the connections with the
hippocampus become less critical for
retrieving the memory. (After Frankland
and Bontempi 2005.)

314 ■ CHAPTER 9
with medial temporal lobe amnesia, retrograde amnesia for autobiographical
(episodic) memory information can be quite extensive, occasionally spanning
almost the entire life of the individual. If interpreted according to standard
consolidation theory, this observation would suggest that the consolidation
process may take more than 40 years—as long as the average human life span
throughout much of history.
To explain this and other phenomena, Nadel and Moscovitch proposed an
alternative model, called the multiple-trace theory, in which episodic memories,
consolidated or otherwise, always depend on the hippocampus. In this account,
the temporal gradient found in some amnesia patients is due not to transfer
to the cortex, but to the number of memory traces for an event stored in the
hippocampus. A central idea of the multiple-trace theory is that each time a
memory is reactivated, a new memory trace for the memory is stored in the
hippocampus. As a result, remote events are encoded by multiple hippocampal
traces and become more resistant to partial hippocampal damage. Thus, partial
damage of the hippocampus would yield a temporally graded amnesia, similar
to the one predicted by standard consolidation theory. However, the multipletrace theory further predicts that when hippocampal damage is complete,
retrieval of both recent and remote memories should be equally affected, and
hence, the retrograde amnesia should be complete (flat) rather than temporally
graded. As for semantic memories, the theory postulates that they are gradually
extracted from repeated episodes and are stored in the cortex independently
of the hippocampus. At present, there is evidence for both the standard and
multiple-trace theories, and their respective strengths and weaknesses are the
topic of much debate.

Consolidation, reactivation, and sleep
A number of studies in recent years have made the case that consolidation is
promoted by memory reactivation during memory retrieval (discussed earlier) and, more surprisingly, during sleep. The idea that memories are also
reactivated, or replayed, during sleep was suggested by behavioral evidence
indicating that sleeping soon after learning attenuates forgetting and enhances
resistance to inference. Electroencephalographic (EEG) studies suggested that
rapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep is more important for nondeclarative memory consolidation, whereas slow-wave sleep is more important for declarative
memory consolidation.
For example, one study implanted electrodes in the hippocampus and visual
cortex of rats, and measured neuronal firing in these brain regions while the
rats ran in a figure-eight maze, as well as during periods of slow-wave sleep
before and after maze running. Localized firing fields were found not only in
hippocampal place cells but also in visual cortex. The cells that fired in specific
locations could be ordered in a sequence (e.g., sequence 01234567 in Figure
9.22A). The most striking finding was that in both the hippocampus and the
visual cortex, the firing sequences found during maze running were replayed
during subsequent slow-wave sleep. Moreover, replay events in the hippocampus and visual cortex were coordinated, suggesting simultaneous reactivation
in the two regions. This simultaneous hippocampal-cortical reactivation was
proposed to gradually strengthen cortical-cortical synapses, leading to memory
consolidation.
Although this evidence is intriguing, to establish a causal link between
sleep replay and memory enhancement, it is important to directly manipulate
sleep replay. To investigate this idea, researchers presented stimuli during sleep
that are associated with the learning experience and can promote replay. In one
such study, participants learned object-location associations while a specific
odor (the scent of roses) was present in the room. Presenting the same smells

DECLARATIVE MEMORY
(A)

(B)

Postrun sleep

Subsequently cued

Subsequently uncued

Visual cortex

Maze running

■ 315

0.5 s

1s

(C)
0.6

Right FFA-LOC
Mean rest correlation (r)

Meow

Changes in error (%)

Hippocampus

1s

0.4

0.2

Baseline

25

Whistle

Change in spatial recall after nap

20
15
10
5
0

0.2 s

Cued

Uncued

Figure 9.22 Consolidation-related changes during sleep and rest (A) Average
firing rate of hippocampal and visual cortex cells while rats were running through
a figure eight–shaped maze, and later while they were sleeping after the run. Each
line corresponds to one cell. In both regions, firing sequences identified during
maze running were replayed during slow-wave sleep, and firing in the two regions
was coordinated during sleep consistent with memory reactivation. (B) In this
behavioral and ERP study, participants learned object-spatial associations while
listening to sounds associated with each object. During a nap after learning, the
sounds for half of the objects were presented during slow-wave sleep. Spatial
memory after the nap improved for cued objects but not for uncued objects. (C)
Functional connectivity between the FFA and LOC regions measured during rest
was enhanced after participants learned a series of object-face associations but
not scene-face associations. (A after Ji and Wilson 2007; B after Rudoy et al. 2009;
C after Tambini et al. 2010.)

Post
Post
object-face scene-face
Rest scan

again during slow-wave sleep increased hippocampal activity and improved
memory for object locations the next day. In another study (Figure 9.22B),
participants learned associations between objects and spatial locations (e.g.,
cat near the bottom left) while listening to a sound associated with each object.
During a nap after learning, the sound for half of the objects was presented
during slow-wave sleep. Spatial memory after the nap improved for cued but
not uncued objects.
While most studies of consolidation-related reactivation have focused on
sleep, consolidation presumably happens during rest while awake too. For example, a recent fMRI study found that functional connectivity among relevant
cortical regions was greater during a rest period after learning than during a
rest period before learning. More specifically, functional connectivity between
regions associated with processing objects (lateral occipital complex, LOC)

316 ■ CHAPTER 9
and faces (fusiform face area, FFA; see Chapter 3) was enhanced after learning
object-face associations but not after learning scene-face associations (Figure
9.22C). Moreover, learning object-face associations also enhanced connectivity
between LOC and the hippocampus, and this increase in connectivity predicted
subsequent memory for the object-face associations.
In short, consolidation occurs at both cellular and system levels. Synaptic consolidation involves changes in synaptic morphology and takes a few
minutes or hours. System consolidation (which must also depend on synaptic
connectivity) involves reorganization in the brain regions supporting long-term
memories and may take days, months, or even years. According to the standard
theory of declarative system consolidation, recent memories depend on the
medial temporal lobes, but, through repeated reactivation, direct associative
connections are created among cortical traces, and memories can be accessed
independently of the medial temporal lobes. This idea can explain the temporally graded retrograde amnesia in patients with medial temporal lobe damage.
According to multiple-trace theory, however, the temporal gradient reflects a
greater number of hippocampal traces for remote memories. But both theories
agree that consolidation involves memory reactivation, which happens not only
during intentional retrieval, but also during sleep and rest.

Summary
1. Declarative memory is conscious memory for events (episodic memory) and facts
(semantic memory). Episodic memory may involve remembering contextual
details (recollection) or merely having vague feelings of knowing (familiarity).
2. According to the most popular model of declarative memory, during encoding,
memory traces are stored in the cortical regions that process each type of information; at the same time, the hippocampus stores indices pointing to these cortical
locations. During this period of storage, some memories are strengthened (by consolidation) while others are lost. During retrieval, activation of hippocampal index
representations leads to the reactivation of cortical traces. Damage to the hippocampus prevents access to cortical memory traces, producing memory loss (amnesia). Importantly, the hippocampus is no longer needed after memories have been
consolidated, explaining why amnesia patients like H.M. can often remember
remote memories. Prefrontal and parietal regions are assumed to mediate control
processes during both encoding and retrieval.
3. Hippocampal memory representations have been described as spatial, relational,
or episodic. Developmental and adult amnesia cases suggest that the hippocampus is more critical for episodic than for semantic memory. Conversely, semantic
dementia cases indicate that the anterior temporal lobe is more critical for semantic than for episodic memory. The hippocampus has also been more strongly
linked to recollection than to familiarity.
4. According to a three-process model, the perirhinal cortex is concerned with memory for objects; the parahippocampal cortex, with memory for spatial layouts; and
the hippocampus, with domain-general relational memory.
5. The organization of semantic knowledge may reflect the sensory and functional
properties of objects and/or semantic categories. Semantic dementia cases suggest
that the anterior temporal lobes could be an amodal semantic “hub,” with some
links to social knowledge.
6. Functional neuroimaging studies and single-unit recordings show that regions
activated during encoding tend to be reactivated during retrieval. Consistent with
transfer-appropriate processing, this reactivation varies with specific encoding
strategies.
7. The left inferior frontal gyrus has been associated with successful episodic encoding, possibly because of its role in semantic processing. The left middle frontal
gyrus has been associated with organizing information during encoding and during retrieval. The right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex has been linked to monitoring processes; and the frontopolar cortex, to retrieval mode.
8. Posterior lateral parietal regions are often activated in episodic retrieval. Dorsal
parietal activations have been linked to top-down attention; and ventral parietal

DECLARATIVE MEMORY
activations, to bottom-up attention. During encoding, ventral parietal activations
are associated with subsequent forgetting.
9. Encoding is not completed immediately, but requires a process of synaptic consolidation, involving gene expression, protein synthesis, and synaptic plasticity.
10. System consolidation is the formation of direct connections among cortical traces,
which allows these traces to be accessed independently of the hippocampus and
could explain why remote memories are often spared by hippocampal damage.
According to a multiple-trace theory, the sparing of remote memories reflects the
creation of new hippocampal traces each time a memory is reactivated.
11. Consolidation is promoted by memory reactivation, whether by intentional practice, during slow-wave sleep, or at rest.

Additional Reading
Reviews
BROWN, M. W. AND J. P. AGGLETON (2001)
Recognition memory: What are the
roles of the perirhinal cortex and hippocampus? Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2: 51–61.
CABEZA, R., E. CIARAMELLI, I. R. OLSON
AND M. MOSCOVITCH (2008) The parietal cortex and episodic memory: An
attentional account. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.
9: 613–625.
DANKER, J. F. AND J. R. ANDERSON (2010)
The ghosts of brain states past: Remembering reactivates the brain regions
engaged during encoding. Psychol. Bull.
136: 87–102.
DAVACHI, L. (2006) Item, context and
relational episodic encoding in
humans. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 16:
693–700.
DUDAI, Y. (2004) The neurobiology of
consolidations, or, how stable is the
engram? Annu. Rev. Psychol. 55: 51–86.
EICHENBAUM, H., A. R. YONELINAS AND
C. RANGANATH (2007) The medial temporal lobe and recognition memory.
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 30: 123–152.
LAMPRECHT, R. AND J. LEDOUX (2004)
Structural plasticity and memory. Nat.
Rev. Neurosci. 5: 45–54.
MARTIN, A. (2007) The representation of
object concepts in the brain. Annu. Rev.
Psychol. 58: 25–45.
NADEL, L. AND M. MOSCOVITCH (1997)
Memory consolidation, retrograde
amnesia and the hippocampal complex.
Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 7: 217–227.

PATTERSON, K., P. J. NESTOR AND T. T.
ROGERS (2007) Where do you know
what you know? The representation
of semantic knowledge in the human
brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 8: 976–987.
SQUIRE, L. R., C. E. STARK AND R. E. CLARK
(2004) The medial temporal lobe. Annu.
Rev. Neurosci. 27: 279–306.

Important Original Papers
BERRYHILL, M. E., L. PHUONG, L. PICASSO,
R. CABEZA AND I. R. OLSON (2007) Parietal lobe and episodic memory: Bilateral damage causes impaired free recall
of autobiographical memory.
J. Neurosci. 27: 14415–14423.
BUCKNER, R. L., S. E. PETERSEN, J. G. OJEMANN, F. M. MIEZIN, L. R. SQUIRE AND
M. E. RAICHLE (1995) Functional anatomical studies of explicit and implicit
memory retrieval tasks. J. Neurosci. 15:
12–29.
DAVIDSON, P. S. R. AND 8 OTHERS (2008)
Does lateral parietal cortex support
episodic memory? Evidence from focal
lesion patients. Neuropsychologia 46:
1743–1755.
JI, D. Y. AND M. A. WILSON (2007) Coordinated memory replay in the visual
cortex and hippocampus during sleep.
Nat. Neurosci. 10: 100–107.
MOSCOVITCH, M. AND B. MELO (1997)
Strategic retrieval and the frontal
lobes: Evidence from confabulation
and amnesia. Neuropsychologia 35:
1017–1034.
POLYN, S. M., V. S. NATU, J. D. COHEN
AND K. A. NORMAN (2005) Categoryspecific cortical activity precedes

■ 317

Go to the COMPANION WEBSITE
sites.sinauer.com/cogneuro2e
for quizzes, animations, flashcards,
and other study resources.

retrieval during memory search. Science
310: 1963–1966.
RASCH, B., C. BUECHEL, S. GAIS AND
J. BORN (2007) Odor cues during
slow-wave sleep prompt declarative
memory consolidation. Science 315:
1426–1429.
RUDOY, J. D., J. L. VOSS, C. E. WESTERBERG
AND K. A. PALLER (2009) Strengthening
individual memories by reactivating
them during sleep. Science 326: 1079.
SAKAI, K. AND Y. MIYASHITA (1991) Neural organization for the long-term
memory of paired associates. Nature
354: 152–155.
WAGNER, A. D. AND 7 OTHERS (1998)
Building memories: Remembering
and forgetting of verbal experiences as
predicted by brain activity. Science 281:
1188–1191.

Books
BADDELEY, A., M. A. CONWAY AND J. P.
AGGLETON, EDS. (2002) Episodic Memory:
New Directions in Research. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
EICHENBAUM, H. AND N. J. COHEN (2004)
From Conditioning to Conscious Recollection: Memory Systems of the Brain. New
York: Oxford University Press.
TULVING, E. (1983) Elements of Episodic
Memory. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
SQUIRE, L. R. AND E. R. KANDEL (1999)
Memory: From Mind to Molecules. New
York: Holt.

