Social Cognition


INTRODUCTION
A major goal of cognitive neuroscience is to identify the neural under-
pinnings of the processes by which individuals understand themselves
and their relationships to others. This subfield, known as social neuro-
science, builds on the developments in affective neuroscience described
in Chapter 10—in particular, the evidence that emotions serve important
social functions. Emotions evident in facial expressions, body language,
and speech are a means by which we communicate our intentions to
others, and by which we interpret their actions. Humans and other
species that live in social groups have evolved mechanisms for establish-
ing hierarchies among members, for building kinship and other social
bonds, and for setting acceptable norms of behavior.
   Dysfunctional social processing can have profound consequences, as
exemplified by autism spectrum disorders (see Introductory Box) and
antisocial personality disorders. In many animals the basis for social
behaviors is determined genetically, with individual experience playing
a relatively minor role. In humans, however, culture, customs, and social
learning markedly influence behavior throughout the life span. Because
social psychologists and neuroscientists have joined forces only recently,
many issues and observations in this field are contentious, and the an-
swers to many questions remain open. This chapter summarizes some of
the areas at the forefront of this new subfield, including self-referential
processing, perception of nonverbal social cues, social categorization,
theory of mind, empathy, and social competition. Social communication
by means of language is taken up specifically in Chapter 12, and social
influences on decision making are discussed in Chapter 14.
360 ■ CHAPTER 11



 ■ INTRODUCTORY BOX AUTISM

 T      he term autism spectrum dis-             (A)                                             (B)
        order refers to any of a range of          Control group        Autistic group
        neurodevelopmental problems
 characterized by functional deficits in
 communication and social interactions,
 and by repetitive, stereotyped behaviors.
 Epidemiological research suggests that
 some form of autism affects up to one
 in every 100 children. The severe form is
 highly heritable, with monozygotic twin
 studies indicating concordance rates
 from 60 to 90 percent.
     Originally described by psychiatrist
 Leo Kanner in 1943, autism (from the
 Greek word autos, meaning “self, same,                                                                                    1.2                                  Control
 spontaneous; directed from within”) is                                                                                                                         Autism




                                                                                                 Signal change (%)
 distinguished from other disorders by                                                                                                                          Baseline
 having social deficits as a core symptom.                                                                                 0.6
 According to the American Psychiatric
 Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical                                                                                    0
 Manual (DSM-IV), the key criteria that de-
 fine social deficits in autism include:
 (1) impairment in using nonverbal behav-                                                                                 –0.6
 iors in social interactions such as eye-
 to-eye gaze, facial expression, and body                                                                                        2    4       6      8     10      12      14
 posture/gestures; (2) failure to develop                                                                                                         Time (s)
 peer relationships appropriate for the indi-                                                                              625
 vidual’s age level; (3) failure to spontane-




                                                                                                 Fixation duration (ms)
 ously seek to share enjoyment, interests,                                                                                 500
 or achievements with other people; and
 (4) lack of social or emotional reciprocity.                                                                              375
 For these reasons, researchers have been
 greatly interested in autistic individuals to        When viewing faces, autistic individuals                             250
 gain insight into the brain regions special-    show reduced activation in the fusiform
                                                                                                                           125
 ized for social cognitive functions. Autism     gyrus, inferior temporal gyrus, superior
 is often accompanied by mental retarda-         temporal sulcus, and amygdala. The ac-                                      0
 tion, and studies have tended to focus on       tivation decrements in the fusiform gyrus                                       0        0.2       0.4      0.6           0.8
 high-functioning autistic individuals, de-      and amygdala correspond to a reduction                                                     Signal change (%)
 fined as those with an IQ of 70 or higher.      in attentional allocation to the faces as
                                                                                                                          Face-processing deficits in autism. (A) In
     Social perception deficits in autism        measured by eye fixations (Figure B). Indi-
                                                                                                                          contrast to control subjects (left), individuals
 include difficulty processing faces, emo-       viduals with autism usually do not exhibit
                                                                                                                          with autism (right) tend to focus on features
 tional expressions, and biological motion.      enhanced activity in these brain regions
                                                                                                                          of faces that are not critical for socioemo-
 Studies using eye-tracking techniques           when the faces that they are viewing
                                                                                                                          tional communication, as the lines tracing
 show that people with autism allocate           express emotions. Finally, unlike controls,
                                                                                                                          eye movement in these photos indicate.
 their attention to noncanonical facial          autistic individuals do not exhibit activity
                                                                                                                          (B) Faces elicit greater fMRI activity in the
 features, such as the forehead, cheeks,         increases in the superior temporal sulcus
                                                                                                                          fusiform gyrus (indicated in the scan and the
 or other features located near the face         when goal-directed biological motion
                                                                                                                          upper graph) in controls than in individuals
 (e.g., earrings). By contrast, most people      sequences are violated, as when viewing
                                                                                                                          with autism. The bottom plot shows that,
 scan faces in a characteristic triangular       animated characters whose reaching ac-
                                                                                                                          in autistic individuals, fusiform activity is
 pattern, looking back and forth between         tions miss their intended targets.
                                                                                                                          positively correlated with the duration of eye
 the two eyes and the mouth—the regions               Social impairments in autism extend
                                                                                                                          fixations on the face. (A from Pelphrey et al.
 that convey the dynamic information used        beyond perceptual processes to include
                                                                                                                          2002; B after Dalton et al. 2005.)
 in social and emotional communication           difficulties in extracting meaning from
 (Figure A). When making social judgments        interpersonal interactions. The inability to
 about others from facial features alone, in-    follow the gaze of other individuals, which
 dividuals with autism tend to overestimate      emerges early in development, contrib-                                   sociate objects in the environment with
 how trustworthy people appear. Such             utes to later impairments in using gaze                                  their names. Individuals with autism often
 challenges in discriminating emotions           to understand other people’s intentions                                  fail theory-of-mind tasks (described later
 and personal characteristics conveyed in        and desires and in developing vocabulary                                 in the chapter), which require participants
 facial displays, in turn, affect how these      skills, which are socially learned by using                              to distinguish their own views and beliefs
 individuals relate to other people.             gaze, head, and pointing gestures to as-                                 from those of others.
                                                                                                                   SOCIAL COGNITION            ■ 361



  ■ INTRODUCTORY BOX (continued)
 (C)                                                   clude more white matter in the cerebrum         research efforts are increasing to help
                                                       and cerebellum and larger cerebral gray         understand this complex disorder.
              Over-  Arrested      Possible decline/   matter, particularly in the frontal lobes
              growth growth        degeneration        and other regions implicated in social
                                                       processing, as outlined already. Howev-
                                                                                                       References
                                                       er, by late childhood these global struc-       BARON-COHEN, S., R. CAMPBELL, A. KARMIL-

 Brain size
                                                       tural differences tend to become normal         OFF-SMITH, J. GRANT AND J. WALKER (1995)
                                                       (Figure C). Aberrant wiring patterns            Are children with autism blind to the
                                                       nonetheless persist in autistic adulthood,      mentalistic significance of the eyes? Brit. J.
                                                       including more short- and medium-range          Dev. Psychol. 13: 379–398.
                                          Normal
                                                       connections within the hemispheres, but         COURCHESNE, E., K. CAMPBELL AND S. SOLSO
                                          ASD
                                                       fewer interhemispheric connections.             (2011) Brain growth across the life span in
                             Age                           Thus, behavioral impairments in autism      autism: Age-specific changes in anatomi-
                                                       are most likely a result of altered process-    cal pathology. Brain Res. 1380: 138–145.
                                                       ing and/or connectivity among interact-         DALTON, K. M. AND 7 OTHERS (2005) Gaze
              Frontal lobe                             ing brain regions that mediate social           fixation and the neural circuitry of face
                                                       cognition, communication, and execu-            processing in autism. Nat. Neurosci. 8:
                                                       tive motor functions. Consistent with this      510–526.
                                                       idea, autistic individuals sometimes have
                                                       extraordinary talent in restricted domains      DICICCO-BLOOM, E. AND 8 OTHERS (2006)
                                                       like mental calculation, historical facts, or   The developmental neurobiology of
                                                       art—a phenomenon sometimes referred             autism spectrum disorder. J. Neurosci. 26:
                                                       to as savant syndrome (see Introductory         6897–6906.
              Temporal                                 Box in Chapter 15). At the same time,           GOLAN, O. AND 6 OTHERS (2010) Enhanc-
              lobe                                     individuals with autism have more difficulty    ing emotion recognition in children with
                                       Cerebellum
                                                       integrating parts into wholes and synthe-       autism spectrum conditions: An interven-
                                                       sizing information across domains (called       tion using animated vehicles with real
                                                       central coherence)—skills that require the      emotional faces. J. Autism Dev. Disord. 40:
                                                       normal operation of interacting large-scale     269–279.
                                                       networks. Their enhanced reliance on            GRANDIN, T. (2011) The Way I See It: A Per-
                                                       local task features and attention to detail     sonal Look at Autism and Asperger’s, 2nd Ed.
                                                       often leads to a bias toward systemizing,       Arlington, TX: Future Horizons.
                                                       the tendency of autistic individuals to ana-
                                                                                                       HAPPÉ, F. AND U. FRITH (2006) The weak
                                                       lyze problems and construct knowledge
                                                                                                       coherence account: Detail-focused cogni-
                                                       by applying rigid, often mechanical, rules.
                                                                                                       tive style in autism spectrum disorders.
                                                           Rehabilitative training in autism fo-
              Amygdala                                                                                 J. Autism Dev. Disord. 36: 5–25.
                                                       cuses on exploiting this penchant for
                                                       rules, mechanics, and focal attention to        KANNER, L. (1943) Autistic disturbances of
                                                       facilitate social and emotional compe-          affective contact. Nerv. Child 2: 217–250.
 Brain growth in autism. (C) Across devel-             tence. For instance, psychologists train        MOLDIN, S. O. AND J. L. R. RUBENSTEIN, EDS.
 opmental stages, there is a general pattern           autistic children to discriminate emotions      (2006) Understanding Autism: From Basic
 of brain enlargement followed by arrested             by morphing human facial expressions            Neuroscience to Treatment. Boca Raton, FL:
 growth. This pattern is found in portions of          onto animated mechanical characters             CRC Press.
 the frontal and temporal lobes, cerebellum,           that move rigidly and express emotions
 and amygdala, among others. ASD, autism                                                               PELPHREY, K. A., N. J. SASSON, J. S. REZNICK,
                                                       according to a specific set of rules. Initial
 spectrum disorder. (C after Courchesne et                                                             G. PAUL, B. D. GOLDMAN AND J. PIVEN
                                                       short-term results of such rehabilitation
 al. 2011.)                                                                                            (2002) Visual scanning of faces in autism.
                                                       exercises are promising, but the extent
                                                                                                       J. Autism Dev. Disord. 32: 249–261.
                                                       to which the eye-tracking and fMRI acti-
                                                       vation patterns improve following training      SCHUMANN, C. M. AND 8 OTHERS (2009) The
     Autistic individuals tend to have rela-           is not known. With increased activity of        amygdala is enlarged in children but not
 tively larger brain volumes, perhaps aris-            advocacy groups, enhanced public                adolescents with autism; the hippocam-
 ing from overgrowth of connections early              awareness, and high-profile personal            pus is enlarged at all ages. J. Neurosci. 24:
 in development. These alterations in-                 triumphs like those of Temple Grandin,          6392–6401.




The Self
Distinguishing oneself from others is a necessary first step in establishing flu-
ent social interactions. Understanding the nature of the self has long perplexed
philosophers, psychologists, and laypeople alike. In his treatise on psychology
362 ■ CHAPTER 11

                   written at the end of the nineteenth century, William James described the self
                   as follows:

                       Whatever I may be thinking of, I am always at the same time more or
                       less aware of myself, of my personal existence. At the same time it is
                       I who am aware; so that the total self of me, being as it were duplex,
                       partly known and partly knower, partly object and partly subject, must
                       have two aspects discriminated in it.
                                                                             W. JAMES 1890, p. 176


                   Despite the conceptual difficulties in defining what constitutes the entity we
                   all consider the self, a core cognitive ability described by James is the ability to
                   consider one’s own being as an object, and thus subject to objective consider-
                   ation. This ability is called self-reflexive thought.
                       Non-human animals presumably possess a rudimentary ability to distin-
                   guish themselves from other animals because of its obvious biological value.
                   However, more complex aspects of self-awareness that characterize humans
                   provide the ability to think of oneself in abstract and even symbolic terms,
                   including the creation of mental images to imagine alternative outcomes in
                   complex social situations.
                       As described in Chapter 15, the capacity for self-awareness evolved in
                   mammals and other animals in conjunction with related social, emotional, and
                   cognitive skills. Animals with small brains and less complex nervous systems
                   seem to operate in the world primarily by responding to external cues. But even
                   rodents can navigate in their environment using either egocentric or allocentric
                   frames of reference, indicating an ability to explore the world either in terms
                   of their own place in it (egocentric, or first-person, view) or simply in terms of
                   external reference points (allocentric, or third-person, view). Head direction cells
                   in the hippocampus, thalamus, and retrosplenial cortex help rodents navigate
                   in an egocentric framework, and shifting between these frames of reference
                   involves transformations in the parietal cortex.
                       Some non-human animals can recognize themselves in a mirror. At first
                   sight, great apes regard the individual reflected in the mirror as a conspecific
                   and display interpersonal social signals. Over time, however, self-directed
                   behaviors, such as self-grooming in response to the reflection become apparent.
                   A hallmark of such self-recognition is the “mark test,” in which an experimenter
                   places a mark on the face or forehead of the animal that is viewable only in the
                   mirror. The mark test is “passed” if the animal repeatedly palpates the mark
                   while viewing itself in the mirror (relative to a comparable baseline period with
                   no mirror present). In addition to great apes, elephants conduct self-examinations
                   by using their trunks to touch a mark visible to them only in the mirror.
                       Despite these rudimentary abilities, self-recognition and self-reflexive
                   behaviors are markedly more advanced in humans. The archaeological record
                   suggests that the rapid development of culture with a focus on the importance
                   of individuals (and thus the self) emerged in the evolution of humans approxi-
                   mately 50,000 years ago, as evidenced by ritualized burials and artifacts of self-
                   ornamentation. The value of symbolic self-reflexive thought is not difficult to
                   imagine. This ability enables an appraisal of one’s personality traits, strengths,
                   and weaknesses in comparison to others and to cultural norms. Such evaluation
                   is essential to successful social behavior by generating self-esteem, regulating
                   one’s actions in social contexts, and abiding by social rules.
                       Whereas humans normally possess a sense of a unitary self across both
                   time and space, the stable concept of the self breaks down in some clinical
                   disorders. For example, fugue states are defined as transient states of confusion
                   in which self-relevant knowledge is temporarily unavailable to consciousness,
                                                                                       SOCIAL COGNITION   ■ 363


and uncharacteristic and often self-destructive behaviors ensue. Fugue states
can arise following some types of epileptic seizures, but how the sense of self
is lost is unknown. In dissociative identity disorder, individuals have recurrent,
multiple identities that emerge to control behavior at different points in time.
This disorder typically originates following exposure to a highly traumatic event,
and therapies are directed toward integrating the identities into a unified stream
of consciousness. While we take a continuous sense of self in our personal lives
for granted, these rare disorders highlight the profound social and behavioral
impairments that can arise when discontinuities in self-awareness emerge.

Self-reflection
Only recently have the approaches of cognitive neuroscience been brought to
bear on these philosophical and clinical concerns by identifying brain areas that
mediate aspects of the self, including self-reflexive thoughts and self-directed
feelings. Self-reflection requires an initial redirection of attentional focus from
external sensory events to internal thoughts, memories, feelings, and visceral
sensations. Two sets of brain regions have been broadly implicated in these
functions—midline cortical regions involved in the default mode of brain pro-
cessing, and limbic/paralimbic regions involved in interoception.
    Recall from Chapter 7 that neuroimaging studies have identified brain
areas whose activity decreases during tasks that require attention to external
stimuli. This default-mode activity thus provides a basis for beginning to un-
derstand the brain regions that are more active during internal self-reflection
and self-projection into another place or time unrelated to the current sensory
environment. This spontaneous, coordinated activity occurs in the dorsal and
ventromedial prefrontal cortex (PFC), posterior cingulate, and medial and lateral
parietal cortex. Some researchers have speculated that this activity reflects an
ongoing stream of consciousness. Indeed, some of these same brain regions
are sensitive to variations in consciousness associated with different levels of
self-awareness (e.g., stages of sleep, the effects of anesthesia, or recovery from
vegetative states; see Chapter 7).
    Building on these observations of resting-state activity, researchers have
directed participants to explicitly engage in self-reflection during brain scanning.
For instance, participants are asked to indicate how well adjectives referring
to personal traits (e.g., ambitious) and sentences (e.g., “I tend to worry a lot”)
describe themselves (self-endorsement tasks), or to compare their personal-
ity traits with those of famous people or individuals they know well (social
comparison tasks). Activity in the anterior medial PFC and parietal regions is
increased when identifying attributes of oneself relative to those of a stranger
(Figure 11.1A). Moreover, TMS applied to the medial parietal cortex has been
reported to temporarily block the retrieval of some self-relevant knowledge.
The degree of anterior medial PFC activity in response to trait words during
self-endorsement tasks also predicts their later recall. Because this finding does
not generalize to nonsocial encoding tasks, such as those involving perceptual
or semantic processing, a particular type of self-referential encoding process
is implied.
    These observations are consistent with studies of autobiographical memory
retrieval, which implicate the same default-mode processing regions. For example,
successful memory retrieval for spatial landmarks cued by photos taken by an
individual elicits greater medial PFC activity than does successful retrieval cued
by photos of the same landmark that were taken by others (Figure 11.1B). As
described in Chapter 10, the medial PFC has been implicated more generally
in mental processes needed to reflect on autobiographical memories, such as
monitoring for their accuracy, and in generating the mental imagery required
in working memory tasks that project actions of the self into the future.
364 ■ CHAPTER 11

Figure 11.1 Role of the medial PFC         (A)
in self-referential processing                                                                                       0.2
(A) Greater activity in the anterior
medial PFC (yellow circle) is found                                                                                  0.1
when participants make trait




                                                                                                Signal change (%)
judgments about themselves relative
                                                                                                                      0
to trait judgments about a best friend
or perceptual judgments about the
                                                                                                                    –0.1
appearance of the trait word (i.e.,
whether it is upper- or lowercase). (B)
Activity in the same brain area during                                                                              –0.2
autobiographical memory retrieval.
College students were instructed to                                                                                 –0.3
take pictures of campus landmarks;
they then viewed these photos, as well                                                                              –0.4
as pictures of the same landmarks                                                                                            Self          Friend           Case
taken by other people. Successful          (B)
recollection of photos taken by the
students themselves was associated
with greater activity in the anterior
medial PFC than was successful
recollection of photos taken by
others. In both (A) and (B), a self-
referential effect is inferred from the
lack of a deactivation pattern typically                                  Self                                Other
seen in midline cortical regions that
constitute the “default mode” of brain
processing. (A after Heatherton et al.     Medial PFC
2006; B after Cabeza et al. 2004.)                              0.3

                                                                0.2

                                                                0.1




                                           Signal change (%)
                                                                 0

                                                               –0.1

                                                               –0.2

                                                                                                                                                    Self
                                                               –0.3
                                                                                                                                                    Other

                                                               –0.4
                                                                      0      1.5   3.0   4.5   6.0                    7.5    9.0    10.5   12.0     13.5    15.0
                                                                                                                    Time (s)



                                               While default-mode research has focused on judgments of personality traits
                                           or past experiences, other work has focused on the subjective feelings that
                                           accompany emotional or painful stimuli. These studies have implicated not
                                           only the brain regions involved in self-reflexive thought, but also brain regions
                                           implicated in interoception and empathy, such as the anterior cingulate and
                                           insula (see Chapter 10 and the discussion later in this chapter). Greater activity
                                           in the rostral anterior cingulate is found when participants are instructed to
                                           report their own arousal in response to emotionally aversive scenes than when
                                           they focus on the spatial layout of the scenes. Focusing on spatial layout, on
                                           the other hand, elicits greater activity in the posterior parietal cortex. Thus,
                                           the same emotional images can engage different brain regions depending on
                                           whether attention is on an internal evaluative response to the images or an
                                           analysis of their sensory features.
                                               Anterior cingulate responses to emotional stimuli and emotional memories
                                           are further enhanced by individual differences in performance on the Levels of
                                                                                      SOCIAL COGNITION   ■ 365


Emotional Awareness Scale, which assesses how deeply and complexly emotions
are experienced. Anterior cingulate activity increases with autonomic measures
of arousal and the subjective experience of the unpleasantness of pain, and it is
implicated in the regulation of pain modulation. This work further reinforces the
idea that the anterior cingulate integrates attentional and emotional functions
(see Chapter 10), but with the more specific goal of directing attention to one’s
own emotional responses in order to motivate plans of action.
    The anterior insula signals awareness of bodily sensations, such as alterations
in respiration and heart rate during arousing states. As reviewed in Chapter
10, the posterior and mid-insula are part of a visceral processing network that
includes brainstem autonomic centers, the hypothalamus, the mediodorsal and
ventromedial thalamus, and the anterior cingulate. Multiple afferent pathways
converge on the anterior insula, particularly in the right hemisphere, which,
in turn, projects to the orbitofrontal cortex. The cortical components of this
hierarchy are hypothesized to represent body state in an integrated way. An
awareness of body states signaled by these cortical regions presumably provides
a basis for self-reflective feelings that involve affective and visceral components
of self-awareness.

Embodiment
Embodiment refers to the sense of being localized within one’s own body. The
psychologist Ulrich Neisser has referred to this aspect of self-knowledge as the
“ecological” self because the physical abilities of the body constrain how indi-
viduals interact with other agents and objects in the environment. The sense
of embodiment gives rise to self-location (the feeling of being at a particular
location and position in space) and egocentric frame of reference (navigating
in the world with reference to one’s own viewpoint and spatial location). The
ability of humans to use symbolic analogues of themselves also permits men-
tal imagery of the position of the body from a non-egocentric frame of refer-
ence (e.g., imaging the view of oneself from behind). In dreams and memories,
experiences are sometimes transformed from a first-person to a third-person
perspective, and some memories, such as the memory of giving a public ad-
dress, tend to have a canonical third-person perspective (e.g., from the vantage
point of the audience).
    Although most individuals experience a spatial unity of self and body, in
certain conditions individuals lose this routine sense. As described in Chapter
7, patients with right parietal damage may ignore or deny the existence of
the left side of their body (neglect syndrome). Others experience sensations
from an amputated body part (phantom limb sensations; see Chapter 4). Still
other patients deny that their body is suffering from a particular ailment (ag-
nosognosia) or may experience a feeling of being located outside their body
(disembodiment). Out-of-body experiences can also be elicited by psychotropic
drugs such as ketamine.
    Two brain regions have been implicated in body representations and dis-
embodiment phenomena. A region of extrastriate visual cortex, sometimes
called the extrastriate body area, is engaged when individuals visually process
human bodies or body parts, imagine changes in the position of a body part, or
adopt a third-person perspective for visualizing their own body (Figure 11.2A).
In addition, out-of-body experiences have been linked to the temporoparietal
junction, a multisensory area at the border between the temporal and parietal
lobes and surrounding the posterior aspect of the Sylvian fissure (Figure 11.2B).
    The Swiss neurologist Olaf Blake examined these phenomena in epileptic
patients undergoing neurosurgery, as well as in healthy adults during mental
imagery tasks. One patient reported out-of-body experiences, illusory changes
in arm and leg position, and whole-body displacements following stimulation of
366 ■ CHAPTER 11

(A)                                                                              (C)
                                                                                                                   Back-facing                                               Front-facing
                 7
                 6
                 5
                 4
                 3
                                                                                                                              Left                  Right                                 Left               Right
                 2
                 1



Distance (cm)
                 0
                 1                                                               Unturned                                                                                    Turned
                 2
                 3
                 4
                 5
                 6                                                                                                  Left                            Right                    Left                           Right
                 7
                 8
                 9
                                                                                   Body task
                10
                                                                                                                     80
                                                                                                                            Back-facing                                      Intraparietal sulcus
                     7   6   5   4   3   2     1 0 1 2       3   4   5   6   7
                                                                                                                     40                                                      Temporoparietal junction
                                             Distance (cm)




                                                                                   Normalized reaction time (ms)
(B)                                                                                                                   0

                                                                                                                    –40
                                                             Out of body
                                                             Auditory
                                                                                                                    –80
                                                             Seizure focus                                           80
                                                             Somatosensory                                                  Front-facing
                                                             Motor                                                   40

                                                                                                                      0

                                                                                                                    –40

Figure 11.2 Brain regions implicated in body perception                                                             –80
and imagery tasks (A) A region of visual cortex is
sensitive to visual features of body parts and is active                           Letter task
during the genesis of body imagery. Each dot represents                                                              80
the peak activation from a different functional imaging                                                                     Unturned
study. (B) The temporoparietal junction is implicated                                                                40
in body illusions and mental transformations of body




                                                                                   Normalized reaction time (ms)
position. Cortical stimulation sites are centered on the                                                              0
right angular gyrus of a patient with epilepsy. Stimulation
at these sites reliably elicited illusions of body movement                                                         –40
and out-of-body experiences. (C) In healthy adults, TMS
applied over the right temporoparietal junction 350 to                                                              –80
550 milliseconds after stimulus onset (gray-shaded area                                                              80
in the body task graphs) produced slower reaction times                                                                     Turned
in making judgments of hand location (red wrists) using                                                              40
a mentally rotated, front-facing body frame of reference,
                                                                                                                      0
but not when making similar dot location judgments on
rotated letters. TMS applied over the intraparietal sulcus                                                          –40
450 to 600 milliseconds after stimulus onset (gray-shaded
area in the letter task graphs) impairs performance in the                                                          –80
                                                                                                                                  100   150   200    250   300   350   400   450    500   550   600   650   700   750   800
                                                                                                                       Baseline
letter rotation task, demonstrating a double dissociation
between the brain areas underlying body and object
mental rotation tasks. (A from Arzy et al. 2006; B after                                                                                            Time since stimulus onset (ms)
Blanke et al. 2005.)
                                                                                       SOCIAL COGNITION   ■ 367


the right angular gyrus in the vicinity of the temporoparietal junction. Another
patient was asked to mentally rotate her body to mimic the viewpoint of her
seizure-induced out-of-body experience, and in this case increased activity was
recorded near the seizure focus at the left temporoparietal junction. Similarly,
healthy adults who imagine rotations of their body axis show enhanced ERP
responses localized by source modeling to the temporoparietal junction bilater-
ally, but with a right-sided bias.
    When TMS is applied to this region, judgments of body rotations are af-
fected, but not judgments of mentally rotated objects (Figure 11.2C). Recall that
areas near the temporoparietal junction in the right hemisphere have also been
implicated in neglect syndrome (see Chapter 7). Given its multisensory input,
this region may integrate visual attention with vestibular and somatosensory
information to track body positions in space, establish an egocentric visual
perspective, and help create a spatial unity of self and body.
    In summary, focusing on oneself relies on processing in particular brain
areas. The midline PFC, cingulate, and parietal regions contribute to aspects
of self-reflexive thought; the insula and anterior cingulate contribute to the
representation of central feelings, visceral sensations, and autonomic arousal;
and the sense of embodiment relies on visual processing in the extrastriate
visual processing areas and on multisensory integration in the temporoparietal
junction. Other aspects of the self, including a first-person perspective during
social interactions, a capacity for self-regulatory control, and the experience of
ownership of intentional actions (agency), build on these basic processes that
mediate focusing one’s attention on the self and on a body representation of
the self.

Perception of Social Cues Evident in the Face
and Body
In primates, nonverbal cues in facial expressions and body language provide
an abundance of information that influences interpersonal exchanges. Consider
your reaction to greeting an acquaintance who fails to make eye contact, whose
head and shoulders are turned down, and whose facial expression is unreactive
during your conversation. Much information about the personality, mood, and
intentionality of others can be inferred from such cues, even unconsciously.
Comparisons of these cues with cultural schemas pertinent to social contexts
and with prior encounters with the same individual allow you to infer the ap-
propriateness of behavior, to detect changes in comportment, and thus to make
appropriate responses. Decoding the nuances of these social signals requires
the development of specialized perceptual skills, for an inability to extract such
information can cause debilitating social deficits, as is evident in autism (see
Introductory Box). The discussion that follows describes the analysis of facial
and body movements; for a discussion of vocal affect, see Chapter 12.

Face perception
Human faces present particularly salient and complex social cues that we use to
infer the mental states of others (a receptive function) and to influence someone
else’s thoughts and behavior (a communicative function). A prominent neuro-
psychological model of face perception (Figure 11.3A) includes a core system for
the visual analysis of facial information that begins by parsing facial features
in the occipital lobe. Following this initial stage, face processing is divided into
two parallel but interacting processing streams. A ventral pathway—includ-
ing portions of the fusiform gyrus and associated inferior temporal cortex—is
specialized for the processing of invariant aspects of face perception in order
to discriminate faces from other objects and to individuate particular people.
368 ■ CHAPTER 11

(A)                                                                                            (B)
                                                                       Extended system:
                                                                       Further processing in
                                                                       concert with other
                                                                       neural systems

                                                                          Intraparietal
                                                                                                                   Superior
                                                                             sulcus
                                                                                                                   temporal
                                                                                                                   sulcus
                                                                        Spatially directed
                                                                        attention
 Core system: Visual analysis                                                                                      Inferior
                                                                                                                   temporal
                                         Superior                           Auditory                               cortex
                                      temporal sulcus                       complex
                                Changeable aspects of faces:            Prelexical speech
                                perception of eye gaze,                 perception
                                expression, and lip movement
      Inferior occipital gyri
                                                                        Amygdala, insula,
      Early perception                                                   limbic system
      of facial features
                                                                        Emotion



                                  Lateral fusiform gyrus/                   Anterior                              Emotion
                                   inferotemporal cortex                  temporal lobe                           Identity
                                                                                                                  Both
                                Invariant aspects of faces:             Personal identity,
                                perception of unique identity           name and                                   Emotion-identity
                                                                        biographical                               interaction
                                                                        information                                Nonselective



Figure 11.3 Pathways for face processing in the temporal lobe (A) Visual                       (C)
information flows along an inferior temporal–hippocampal route for facial
identity, person recognition, and name retrieval. By contrast, a superior                                         Emotion
temporal–amygdala route processes dynamic feature encoding of facial                                              Identity
information, including analysis of eye gaze and emotional expression. (B) Single
neurons in the monkey temporal lobe code for facial expression and identity.
Macaque monkeys were shown three faces of conspecifics that expressed
three different emotions. Recordings were obtained from 45 neurons that
showed selective responses to faces relative to other objects. Whereas most
emotion-selective neurons were located in the superior temporal sulcus, most
                                                                                                                    pSTS
identity-selective neurons were located in the inferior temporal cortex. (C)
Similar dorsal-ventral dissociations in the temporal lobe are apparent in human                                            ITG
subjects when participants are presented with faces that changed in either
emotional expression or personal identity. aSTS, anterior superior temporal                                aSTS
sulcus; ITG, inferior temporal gyrus; pSTS, posterior superior temporal sulcus.
(A after Haxby et al. 2000; B after Hasselmo et al. 1989; C from LaBar et al.
2003.)


                                                Recall from Chapter 3 that a region in the fusiform gyrus called the fusiform face
                                                area is to some degree specialized for encoding such information about faces.
                                                Face representations of this ventral pathway are then linked with semantic and
                                                episodic knowledge about individuals (such as their names, personalities, and
                                                memories of shared experiences) through additional processing stages in the
                                                anterior temporal lobe, including the hippocampus and surrounding cortex. In
                                                this way, the ventral pathway forms the basis for person recognition.
                                                    Another pathway routed through more dorsal sectors of the temporal lobe,
                                                including the superior temporal sulcus (STS), is thought to process dynamic
                                                facial features, such as changes in emotional expression, mouth movements,
                                                                                                                SOCIAL COGNITION        ■ 369


and gaze shifts (see Figure 11.3A). The detection of these attributes of biological
motion is relayed to the amygdala and other limbic forebrain structures for the
analysis of emotion, to multisensory areas for the integration of mouth move-
ments with speech, and to the parietal lobe for spatially directed attention in
response to head movements or gaze shifts. The two pathways must interact
(e.g., detecting your sister’s quirky smile can facilitate her identification), and
later processing stations are assumed to feed back onto earlier ones to enhance
attention to particular facial features as necessary (e.g., to focus attention on
specific face parts in order to resolve ambiguous facial expressions).
    Evidence for the partial independence of invariant and dynamic featural
processing of faces comes from studies of prosopagnosic patients who have
suffered damage to ventral regions of the temporal lobe (see Introductory Box
in Chapter 3). These patients have difficulty recognizing individuals by their
facial features, but they often identify emotional facial expressions correctly. In
contrast, patients with damage to the amygdala or STS have difficulty evaluat-
ing emotional expression and/or eye gaze direction, but they can recognize and
name individuals normally. Electrophysiological recordings from neurons in the
temporal lobe in non-human primates confirm that different populations of cells
are specialized for signaling facial identity versus facial expression (Figure 11.3B),
in accord with neuroimaging observations in normal humans (Figure 11.3C).
    Evidence for the integration of dynamic social information in faces has also
come from electrophysiological studies of non-human primates. When monkeys
watch images of conspecifics, neurons of the STS tend to increase their firing
rate when there is a correspondence between the direction of head movement
and the direction of eye gaze, suggesting a preference for a spatial alignment
of these two signals (e.g., face forward with eye contact, or both face and eyes
averted). In the human amygdala, activity in response to facial expressions also
varies according to whether the direction of gaze is forward or averted (Figure
11.4). Responses in both of these regions are enhanced to stimuli that present
dynamic shifts in facial configurations compared to static displays.
    Decoding rapid changes in facial movements facilitates quick reactions during
personal interactions and helps predict the impending actions of others. The
ability to extract signals from the position of the eyes may have been helped by
an evolutionary change in the color of the sclera, from the darker color in non-
human primates to white in hominids. The whites of the eyes make it easier to
discern the direction of gaze, and they are important for detecting a person’s
emotional state. For example, in response to the sympathetic nervous system
activity elicited by fear, the palpebral fissure widens markedly, showing more
scleral white, and the pupils dilate.



                                             0.16




                                              Signal change (%)
                                                                                               Figure 11.4 The importance of eye features
                                                                                               in socioemotional communication The
                                                                                               amygdala responds with more intense fMRI
                                                                                               activation to threatening faces when eye
                                                                                               gaze is direct compared to when it is averted.
                                                                                               Individuals tend to judge direct eye contact
                                                                                               in the context of a negative social interaction
                                                            0                                  as being more threatening. (After Adams et al.
                                                                  Direct gaze   Averted gaze   2003.)
370 ■ CHAPTER 11


                                             Perception of biological motion
                                             Nonverbal communication entails much more than analyzing faces; as already
                                             implied, body movements and gestures are equally important. In parallel with face
                                             processing, visual information about the position and status of other body parts
                                             is relayed from visual areas (including the specialized extrastriate body area) to
                                             similar person recognition and biological motion pathways in the temporal lobe.
                                                 Neuroimaging and intracranial recording studies of body part gestures
                                             and whole-body ambulation indicate that the posterior STS, particularly in the
                                             right hemisphere, discriminates biologically plausible from implausible motion
                                             (Figure 11.5). Responses of the STS are greater to human and robotic walking
                                             relative to either coherent mechanical motion, such as pendulum swings, or
                                             fragmented biological motion (moving but detached body parts). This brain area
                                             also responds to human walking even when body parts are partially occluded,
                                             which is important for tracking biological motion in natural circumstances.
                                                 The STS shows a preference for body actions that are meaningful and goal-
                                             directed. For instance, hand and arm gestures that complete intentional action


                                             (A)




                                                   Baseline        Leftward gaze       Rightward gaze       Mouth opening




                                                                                         Scalp




Figure 11.5 Perception of biological
motion activates the STS (A) Intra-                                                     Depth
cranial recordings were taken from
an epilepsy patient with electrodes
implanted in the temporal lobe to                                                           +
monitor seizures (electrode locations
                                                                                       50 μV
indicated by arrow in MRI scan).
Depth electrodes in the STS respond
strongly to mouth movements (red                                                               100 ms
line) relative to shifts in gaze direction   (B)
(blue and green lines) or static faces
(“baseline”). ERPs recorded from
the scalp of a healthy participant
over the temporal lobes indicate a
similar response pattern arising from
a source in the vicinity of the STS.
μV = microvolts. (B) A summary of
neuroimaging studies of biological
motion reveals a focus of activity
in the STS and adjacent cortical
surface. Each colored dot represents
a different experiment. (From Allison et
al. 2000.)
                                                                                                                                      SOCIAL COGNITION     ■ 371


sequences, such as grabbing a coffee cup and lifting it to the lips, are signaled
more robustly than are meaningless or scrambled action sequences. In accord
with this observation, sign language gestures that complete grammatically
appropriate sentences engage this region more in studies of congenitally deaf
individuals than do nonsense gestures.
    Activity in the STS further indicates when body movements violate expec-
tations set up by the social circumstance or conflict with other cues (Figure
11.6). For instance, when watching an animated figure direct eye movements
in response to the appearance of a visual target, participants’ activation in the
STS are stronger when the figure’s gaze fails to track the object than when
it succeeds (Figure 11.6A). In most natural situations, a person’s gaze tracks

(A)
                      Correct
                                                                                                  4.5




                                                                 Change in MR signal intensity
                                                                                                                 Correct
                                                                                                  3.5            Incorrect

                                                                                                  2.5

                                                                                                  1.5

                      Incorrect                                                                   0.5

                                                                                                 –0.5

                                                                                                 –1.5
                                                                                                        –3.0 –1.5 0.0 1.5 3.0 4.5 6.0 7.5 9.0 10.5 12 13.5 15 16.5
                                                                                                                                  Time (s)

(B)
                                                                                                 Happy                                Disgusted
Avatar responses



                                                                                                                                                         Facial
                                                                                                                                                         expression




                                                                                                                                                         Hand
                                                                                                                                                         gesture



                                                           Reject                                          Accept            Reject           Accept
                                                             X                                               √                 √                  X
                                                 Figure 11.6 Signaling expectancy violations from biological motion
       STS                             IFG       cues in the STS (A) Participants watched an animated character whose
                                                 eyes moved in response to the sudden appearance of a peripheral target.
                                                 Activation in the STS was greater when the gaze direction deviated from the
                                                 target than when it correctly tracked the target. (B) Participants interacted
                                                 with a virtual character by offering her a virtual gold coin. The character
                                                 reacted to the participant’s action through a combination of a change in facial
                                                 expression (happy, disgusted) and an arm gesture (accept the coin, reject the
                                                 coin). Activation in the STS and inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) was greater when
                                                 the facial expression and gesture were incongruent (e.g., happy expression
                                                 combined with rejection gesture, or disgusted expression combined with
                                                 acceptance gesture) than when they were congruent. Signaling conflicting
                                                 nonverbal cues in the context of goal-directed actions helps individuals track
       R                              p = .001
                                                 when the behavior of others is inconsistent with their intentions or is internally
                                                 inconsistent. (A after Pelphrey et al. 2003; B from Zucker et al. 2011.)
372 ■ CHAPTER 11

                   objects that suddenly appear in the environment, so gaze tracking failures are
                   considered a violation of expected behavior. In addition, the STS preferentially
                   signals when animated characters display conflicting information between their
                   arm gestures and facial affect during a social exchange compared to when these
                   cues are congruent (Figure 11.6B). Such studies highlight the importance of
                   prior knowledge about how people typically behave in social settings (generally
                   or individually) in gleaning insight into the meaning of their current actions.
                       Interpretation of body language is effective only insofar as it leads to ap-
                   propriate planning of actions in social settings. The readout of gestural infor-
                   mation from regions like the STS feeds into attentional and executive systems
                   in the parietal lobe and premotor areas of the frontal lobe to plan appropriate
                   behavior. The output of the STS is conveyed to frontoparietal cortices for at-
                   tentional modulation and action planning, as well as to limbic brain structures
                   for further interpretation of the emotional and motivational significance of the
                   motion patterns.

                   Interpersonal attention and action direction
                   In social groups, changes in body posture, head orientation, direction of gaze,
                   and facial expression are combined with vocalizations to communicate the at-
                   titudes of individuals toward one another and to signal the presence of signifi-
                   cant stimuli in the environment. How these cues are used to interpersonally
                   direct attention and initiate group actions has been investigated in studies of
                   social referencing and joint attention.
                       Social referencing refers to the use of body gestures and facial and vocal
                   expressions of others to determine how to deal with an ambiguous or novel
                   situation. During development, social referencing is critical for learning how to
                   appropriately behave in particular situations, given the lack of social knowledge
                   and self-regulation abilities of young children. For instance, when confronted by
                   a visual cliff apparatus that gives the illusion of a sudden drop in height, 10- to
                   12-month-old infants will cross the cliff only if guided by positive emotions
                   and encouraging gestures expressed by the parent. In this case, the nonverbal
                   signals communicate to the child whether approach or withdrawal behavior
                   is appropriate in a given context. The emotions in this situation are used to
                   direct the actions of the infant rather than to express the internal state of the
                   parent. Social referencing occurs in a variety of interpersonal contexts to glean
                   information from others to help select appropriate actions.
                       Joint attention refers to the allocation of processing resources toward an object
                   cued by another individual. This ability emerges in infants around 1 year of age.
                   Gaze direction, head orientation, and body and trunk position all indicate where
                   an individual is focusing attention, making it easy for others to take advantage
                   of this information, particularly to make inferences about features of the envi-
                   ronment that otherwise would be ignored, or that are out of one’s own field of
                   view. Non-human primates can also exploit joint attention through deception,
                   presenting misleading displays to others and then directing their own actions
                   elsewhere. In humans, this behavior is exemplified by pickpockets, magicians,
                   and athletes, who fake an intended action to facilitate a different one.
                       Such abilities require knowledge about how others cue spatial locations in the
                   environment. Electrophysiological studies of the monkey STS show that some
                   neurons are tuned to multiple body features to signal the information conveyed
                   by the orientation of a conspecific animal. For example, a neuron might fire in
                   much the same way in response to downward deflection of the eyes or head,
                   or a crouched body position of another monkey, all of which indicate the other
                   animal’s attention to something on the ground.
                       A variant of the Posner attentional cuing task (see Chapter 6) has been used
                   to investigate how gaze shifts can direct visual spatial attention in monkeys
                                                                                                                   SOCIAL COGNITION          ■ 373


and humans. Recall that in this task a central cue is used to direct attention
toward a peripheral location in space where an upcoming target may appear.
For faces, the position of the eyes serves as a salient cue about where someone is
focusing attention in space (even more so than head direction or body posture
in some circumstances). To model such behaviors experimentally, subjects in
a gaze-directed attentional cuing paradigm are shown a face and are required
to respond to a subsequent target that appears either in a location cued by
the gaze of the face (valid trials) or in the opposite hemifield (invalid trials)
(Figure 11.7). The subject’s reaction time to detect or discriminate the target is
then compared for validly cued and invalidly cued trials to quantify whether
the gaze shift was attended by the participant (who is given no other explicit
instruction about where to attend). Compared to the use of arrow cues in the
standard Posner task, subjects are more willing to follow gaze even when its
predictive value is low, suggesting more automaticity in following gaze than
in using other symbols to guide attention.
    Valid gaze cues improve target detection performance and lead to larg-
er-amplitude early ERP components (P1 and N1) to those targets, implying


                                                   Blank screen




                                   Target:
                                   left or right

                                                                                                500 ms

                   Gaze:
                   turning to
                   left or right

                                                                                   Until response

Gaze:
looking at
the observer

                                                                          500 ms




                                                             500 ms


                                            N1


               4




Voltage (RV)
               0                                                                   Figure 11.7 Modulation of attentional orienting by gaze
                                                                                   cuing Participants view a face with a sudden onset of a
                                                                                   particular direction of gaze. Targets subsequently appear
                                                                                   either in the location at which gaze is directed (valid trials) or
           –4                                                                      in the opposite visual field (invalid trials). Reaction times are
                                    P1
                                                                  Valid trials     faster on valid trials (the illustration above the graph shows
                                                                  Invalid trials   only an invalid trial), and ERP amplitudes are enhanced for
                                                                                   early-latency potentials (P1 and N1) that indicate attentional
                     0                      200                    400             enhancements in extrastriate cortex. μV = microvolts. (After
                                          Time (ms)                                Schuller and Roisson 2001.)
374 ■ CHAPTER 11

                   attentional modulation of visual processing in extrastriate regions of cortex (see
                   Chapter 6). Invalidly cued targets show slower reaction times and elicit later
                   enhancement of a P300 component, suggesting a need to update information in
                   working memory because the target appears in an unexpected location. Viola-
                   tions of expectancy based on gaze direction also modulate fMRI activity in the
                   STS, further supporting the important role of this region in using biological
                   motion cues to guide attention in social settings.
                       In sum, nonverbal cues from the face and body provide a wealth of informa-
                   tion that facilitates social interaction. Analysis of this information aids person
                   recognition, provides insight into an individual’s emotional state, and guides
                   interpersonal behavior through social referencing and joint attention. Several
                   brain regions contribute to the perception of social cues, including face- and
                   body-processing regions of the visual cortex, the amygdala, and the STS. Some
                   of these areas, such as the amygdala and STS, are sensitive to multiple com-
                   municative signals. Stronger responses are elicited in the STS when perceived
                   actions violate expectations, which helps to indicate when the behavior of others
                   doesn’t align with their goals or when they are expressing mixed messages.


                   Social Categorization
                   The perception of people’s identifying features is also used to gauge the char-
                   acteristics of individuals and place them into social groups. Resource models in
                   social psychology argue that such processes are useful because they facilitate
                   our ability to form impressions and make sense of those around us, especially
                   given the large social network size of humans. For instance, if you are intro-
                   duced to someone who claims to be a member of a particular political party
                   or religious sect, this information can provide some clues as to the person’s
                   core values. Categorizing individuals in this way involves both automatic and
                   controlled processes and is influenced by cultural norms, knowledge of ste-
                   reotypes, and personal attitudes.
                       From an evolutionary perspective, social categorization serves important
                   survival functions in defending territories from invading groups, identifying
                   and protecting kin, and selecting mates. In human cultures, however, it is all too
                   clear that prejudicial reactions based on stereotypes of individuals according
                   to their gender, race, and other factors can and do lead to social injustice. As
                   a result, there is much interest in using neuroscientific approaches to inform
                   theories and identify mechanisms of stereotyping and social categorization,
                   and to determine the extent to which these phenomena can be voluntarily
                   regulated and changed by social interactions with others.

                   Perception of social category information
                   Research using ERPs has identified the earliest stages of neural processing that
                   are influenced by social category information such as race. ERPs have been
                   the favored method because their temporal sensitivity permits an investiga-
                   tion of rapid, automatic influences of category information before participants
                   can engage deliberate control processes to alter their responses (e.g., to appear
                   more egalitarian). In a typical study, subjects view faces that vary in ethnicity
                   (along with gender and other factors) and categorize those faces according to
                   either racial or nonracial features. Effects attributed to racial categorization
                   generally appear within 200 milliseconds of stimulus onset and are character-
                   ized by larger frontocentral N1 and P2 amplitudes for racial out-group faces
                   than for racial in-group faces (Figure 11.8). These early ERP components index
                   attentional orienting responses (see Chapters 2 and 6) and may reflect greater
                   vigilance to unfamiliar out-group members. Later in time the racial category
                   effects reverse, such that enhanced frontocentral N2 responses are observed to
                                                                                                                                                     SOCIAL COGNITION         ■ 375


(A) Implicit Association Test (IAT)                                                        275                                               Figure 11.8 Amygdala activity
                                                                                           250                                               and racial bias Amygdala activity in
 R                                    L                                                                                                      response to novel African American
                                                                                           225                                               faces correlates with implicit
                                                                                                                                             measures of racial bias in Caucasian



                                                    IAT (black-white)
                                                                                           200
                                                                                           175                                               participants. Although the amygdala
                                                                                                                                             did not exhibit an overall difference
                                                                                           150                                               between African American (black)
                                          r                                                125                                               and Caucasian (white) faces when
                                              .92
                                                                                           100                                               averaged across all participants,
                                                                                                                                             the degree to which the amygdala
                                                                                            75
                                                                                                                                             differentiated African American
                                                                                            50                                               and Caucasian faces in individual
                                              .72
                                                                                            25                                               participants is correlated with (A)
                                                                                                 –2   0     2    4      6     8    10   12   Implicit Association Test performance
                                                                                                          Aggregate activity score           and (B) differential startle eyeblink
                                                                                                                                             responses to the faces obtained
(B) Startle eye-blink                                                                       12                                               outside the scanning environment.
                                                                                            10
                                                                                                                                             Correlation coefficients (r) are




                                                         Startle eye-blink (black-white)
 R                                    L                                                                                                      displayed in the fMRI scans (left), and
                                                                                             8
                                                                                                                                             aggregate scores of significant activity
                                                                                             6                                               are displayed in the graphs (right).
                                                                                             4                                               (After Phelps et al. 2000.)
                                                                                             2
                                                                                             0
                                          r
                                              .80                                           –2
                                                                                            –4
                                                                                            –6
                                              .60                                           –8
                                                                                           –10
                                                                                                 –2   0    2   4    6     8 10 12       14
                                                                                                          Aggregate activity score




in-group faces, perhaps indicating a shift toward greater individuation of the
faces (see Figure 11.8). The impact of social category on early ERP amplitudes is
greater when viewing racially unambiguous compared to ambiguous (biracial)
faces, and when viewing faces relative to other body parts.
    These ERP effects are present regardless of whether the task requires an
overt racial categorization or not. Other studies have replicated these findings
using tasks known to reduce stereotyping effects, such as detecting a particular
visual feature in the stimulus (feature detection task) or judging whether the
person depicted is likely to be introverted or to exhibit a particular food prefer-
ence (individuation task). Such observations indicate that the early processing
of social category information may be relatively obligatory, even when that
information is not critical to the context of the social interaction.

Stereotypes and automatic racial biases
In addition to the analysis of perceptual features that indicate social categories,
interpersonal exchanges can be affected by stereotypes, prejudicial emotional
responses, and, ultimately, overt discrimination. In racially biased individuals,
executive processing resources are often recruited in an effort to control the
expression of automatic negative attitudes toward out-group members. Even in
individuals with more egalitarian social views, automatic activation of familiar
cultural stereotypes must be overcome to guide social behavior according to
one’s own attitudes. Building on a foundation of research on emotion processing,
emotion regulation, and cognitive control (see Chapters 10 and 13), research-
ers have begun to identify brain regions whose activity relates to measures of
racism and interracial interactions.
376 ■ CHAPTER 11

                       One such study reported a correlation in Caucasian participants between
                   amygdala activity in response to unfamiliar African American faces and two
                   implicit indices of racial bias: the Implicit Association Test (IAT; Box 11A)
                   and startle eyeblink responses (see Figure 11.8). Because potentiated eyeblink
                   responses are indicative of negative evaluations (see Box 10A), this study pro-
                   vided additional validation of the IAT as a measure of implicit racial attitudes.
                   The results did not extend to explicit measures of racial bias as assessed by the
                   Modern Racism Scale (see Box 11A), implying that the brain imaging findings
                   may be more specifically associated with implicit racial biases. Subsequent
                   research has also related startle responses and amygdala activation to implicit
                   racial bias but has also shown that these effects are attenuated when the faces are
                   familiar, when the faces have averted rather than direct gaze (which minimizes
                   their threat value; see Figure 11.4), when the task emphasizes individuated
                   rather than categorical processing of people, or when the faces are shown for
                   prolonged durations (presumably reflecting engagement of control processes).
                       Additional evidence suggests that face-processing regions of the fusiform
                   gyrus show enhanced activity for faces of one’s own race, perhaps because of
                   greater individuation and/or familiarity with in-group members. Together,
                   these findings highlight the plasticity, contextual modulation, and regional
                   specificity of neurophysiological activity when members of stigmatized cultural
                   groups are evaluated in various ways.
                       Such work presents numerous ethical and experimental challenges, and the
                   results must be interpreted cautiously. For instance, functional brain imaging is
                   inherently correlational, and the causal role of brain activity in a given region
                   for behavior as complex as social biases can only be suggestive. A brain scan
                   cannot definitively indicate whether someone is racially biased, whether the
                   activity patterns represent a source or a consequence of behavior, or whether
                   the activity has been shaped by prior exposure to stereotyped messages or
                   by personal experiences. Brain imaging provides only a snapshot of activity
                   in an experimental setting during the performance of a particular cognitive
                   task, and the results may not generalize to behavior during real-world social
                   exchanges. Finally, such measures rarely distinguish between activation of
                   semantic knowledge related to cultural stereotypes versus a personal, evalua-
                   tive attitude toward members of a social category.

                   Monitoring and controlling racial bias
                   Additional work has focused on neural mechanisms engaged when group ste-
                   reotypes induce response conflicts and motivate a need for voluntary control
                   over biases that might be expressed. A two-stage model of cognitive control
                   (see Chapter 13) supposes the following: (1) that anterior cingulate activity
                   reflects continual monitoring of conflict during information processing; and
                   (2) that prefrontal regions are subsequently recruited to implement regulatory
                   responses once a need for conflict resolution has been detected. This frame-
                   work has been combined with knowledge about sources of ERP components
                   to make predictions regarding when and how cognitive control is engaged in
                   interracial scenarios. For this objective, a key ERP component is the error-related
                   negativity (ERN), which is sensitive to information-processing conflicts that lead
                   to response errors. The ERN has been localized to the anterior cingulate gyrus
                   and offers a potential neural index of ongoing conflict monitoring that can be
                   applied to studying personal interactions that lead to self-regulation failures
                   (see Chapter 13 for other interpretations of the ERN).
                        As an example, the ERN has been used to investigate conflict monitoring of
                   racial stereotypes on a weapons identification task. In this rapid classification
                   task, Caucasian participants had to decide whether briefly presented pictures of
                   objects on a computer screen were weapons or tools. Prior to each presentation,
                                                                                                           SOCIAL COGNITION           ■ 377



  ■ BOX 11A MEASURING IMPLICIT AND EXPLICIT RACIAL ATTITUDES

 T       o measure implicit racial attitudes,
         investigators commonly use the
         Implicit Association Test (IAT) de-
 veloped by social psychologist Anthony
 Greenwald and his colleagues. In one
                                                rican American faces with positive words
                                                and Caucasian faces with negative words
                                                than the reverse. Alternate versions as-
                                                sess attitudes toward other social groups
                                                based on characteristics such as age,
                                                                                               trophysiological signatures of automatic
                                                                                               evaluative processes (see text).

                                                                                               References
 version of this test, participants are         gender, sexual orientation, and political or   CUNNINGHAM, W. A., K. J. PREACHER AND
 presented with a series of faces (either       religious affiliation (you can test yourself   M. R. BANAJI (2001) Implicit attitude mea-
 African American or Caucasian) inter-          at http://www.implicit.harvard.edu).           sures: Consistency, stability, and conver-
 mixed with positively and negatively va-           Although the reasons for the reaction-     gent validity. Psychol. Sci. 12: 163–170.
 lenced words that represent good or bad        time costs are debated (including sug-         GEHRING, W. J., A. KARPINSKI AND J. L.
 concepts (e.g., friend, enemy). One set        gestions that they reflect knowledge of        HILTON (2003) Thinking about interracial
 of trials requires the same button-press       cultural stereotypes rather than personal      relations. Nat. Neurosci. 6: 1241–1243.
 response for both African American faces       attitudes), the IAT has good test reli-        GREENWALD, A. G., D. E. MCGHEE AND J.
 and negative words, whereas another            ability. Furthermore, the IAT has been         K. L. SCHWARTZ (1998) Measuring indi-
 response is given for both Caucasian           validated with a psychophysiological           vidual differences in implicit cognition:
 faces and positive words. The response         index of evaluative emotional responding       The Implicit Association Test. J. Pers. Soc.
 requirements are then reversed so that         (see the text). Performance on this test       Psychol. 74: 1464–1480.
 participants make the same button-press        is compared to other paper-and-pencil
 response for both African American             assessments that test racial attitudes         MCCONAHAY, J. B. (1996) Modern racism,
 faces and positive words, and another          explicitly, such as the Modern Racism          ambivalence, and the Modern Racism
 response for both Caucasian faces and          Scale. Other tests determine whether           Scale. In Prejudice, Discrimination, and
 negative words. Participants are instruct-     subjects are motivated to respond to           Racism, J. Dovidio and S. Gaertner (eds.).
 ed to respond as quickly as possible.          out-groups in a way that appears more          Orlando, FL: Academic Press, pp. 91–125.
      Implicit racial biases are quantified     socially appropriate to others. Often, IAT     PLANT, E. A. AND P. G. DEVINE (1998) Inter-
 as a difference in reaction time for the       performance reveals biases in process-         nal and external motivation to respond
 second condition compared to the first,        ing that are not captured by the explicit      without prejudice. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 69:
 such that higher scores reflect greater        measures and can be related to elec-           811–832.
 difficulty (response cost) when pairing Af-




an African American or Caucasian face was flashed on the screen. Priming of
objects by African American faces tended to facilitate detection of weapons and
impair detection of tools, whereas priming by Caucasian faces had no differential
effect. The ERN that was time-locked to the response showed not only sensitiv-
ity to performance (larger for errors than for correct object classifications) but
also stereotype incongruity on error trials (larger for tools primed by African
American faces than for the other face-object combinations; Figure 11.9).
    The ERN stereotyping effects were larger in individuals who characterized
themselves as being primarily internally motivated to regulate prejudiced reac-
tions than in those who acknowledge avoidance of social disapproval as part of
the motivation to regulate their reactions. If the two-stage model of cognitive
control is correct, this finding suggests that internally motivated individuals
exhibit greater online monitoring of stereotype conflict as a potentially biased
response is generated. Because the behavioral and ERN results occur in in-
dividuals with low levels of racial bias, they implicate a Stroop-like response
conflict due to automatic activation of learned cultural stereotypes in relation
to aggression and hostility (see Chapters 7 and 13 for a discussion of the Stroop
effect). Internally motivated, low-bias individuals have greater motivation to
override these automatic stereotypes in order to behave in accordance with
their own egalitarian principles.
    Prefrontal responses to out-group faces may also mediate the relationship
between implicit racial attitudes and cognitive consequences following an
interracial encounter. In one study, researchers gave Caucasian participants
the IAT test followed by a staged encounter with either an African American
or a Caucasian experimenter, who asked them to comment on social topics of
378 ■ CHAPTER 11

                                                                        racial profiling and the college fraternity system. A classic Stroop color-naming
                                                                        interference task (see Chapter 13) was then administered. In a separate session,
                                                                        the participants underwent fMRI scanning while being presented with either
                                                                        African American or Caucasian faces. Performance on the Stroop task was quanti-
                                                                        fied as a function of implicit racial attitudes and the race of the experimenter in
                                                                        the social encounter, and compared with the fMRI activity to out-group faces.
                                                                            As Figure 11.10 shows, individuals characterized by implicit racial biases
                                                                        based on IAT performance exhibited greater Stroop interference following the

(A)                                                Black or       Gun or
                                    Pattern       white face       tool       Pattern
                                     mask           prime         target       mask
Time
                                      1s            200 ms        200 ms     Response




                                                                                                      Figure 11.9 Error-related negativity (ERN) and
                                                                                                      social stereotypes (A) Participants had to categorize
                                                                                                      whether the objects presented were guns or tools.
                                                                                                      These objects were primed by brief presentations of
                                                                                                      black or white male faces. (B) Presumably because of
                                                                                                      cultural stereotypes linking black males with hostility,
(B)
                           Tools                                  ERN                                 participants made more errors in identifying tools when
                     –10                                                                              primed by a black face (behavioral data not shown),
                                     Black-tool correct                                               and these errors were associated with larger ERN
                                     White-tool correct                                               responses than when tools were primed by a white face.
                                     Black-tool error                                                 No differences due to the priming manipulation were
                      –5             White-tool error                                                 found on gun trials. (C) ERN activity to tools primed by




ERN amplitude (μV)
                                                                                                      black male faces was larger for individuals who were
                                                                                                      internally motivated to respond without prejudice (good
                                                                                                      regulators) than for those not motivated (nonregulators)
                       0                                                                              or those motivated by external factors to appear
                                                                                                      unbiased in social contexts (poor regulators). This ERN
                                                                                                      pattern suggests that individuals who are internally
                                                                                                      motivated to respond without prejudice have greater
                       5                                                                              demands placed on automatic control processes when
                                                                                                      cultural stereotypes are activated. μV = microvolts.
                                                                                                      (A,B after Amodio 2008; C after Amodio et al. 2008.)
                                                                                                (C)
                      10                                                                                                              ERN

                           Guns                                                                             Good regulators
                     –10                                                                        –10         Poor regulators
                                    Black-gun correct                                                       Non-regulators
                                    White-gun correct
                                    Black-gun error
                      –5            White-gun error                                              –5




ERN amplitude (μV)
                       0                                                                          0



                       5                                                                          5



                      10                                                                         10
                      –400         –300    –200      –100      0      100   200    300   400     –400     –300   –200   –100       0     100   200   300    400
                                                            Time (ms)                                                          Time (ms)
                                                                                                                                                          SOCIAL COGNITION       ■ 379


(A)                                                                                                            (B)
                                                              0.5                                                                               250




                                                                                                               Mean Stroop interference score
                      t-statistic                             0.4




                                    Mean signal change (%)
                                                                                                                                                200
                                                              0.3
                             3                                0.2                                                                               150
                                                              0.1
                                                                                                                                                100
                                                                0
                             2
                                                             –0.1                                                                                50
                                                             –0.2
                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                             –0.3
                             1
                                                             –0.4                                                                               –50
                                                                    0   100     200       300      400   500                                     –0.4 –0.3 –0.2 –0.1 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
                                                                           Racial bias (IAT) score                                                            Mean signal change (%)

Figure 11.10 Implicit racial attitudes and cognitive performance (A) Individuals
who had greater dorsolateral PFC activity (circled) in response to out-group
faces also had greater implicit racial biases as assessed by the IAT. (B) The same
individuals exhibited a strong relationship between right dorsolateral PFC activity and
color Stroop task interference following an interracial encounter. (After Richeson et
al. 2003.)



interracial encounter, but not following the encounter with an in-group member.
Functional MRI analyses revealed a positive correlation between performance
on the IAT test and activity in the anterior cingulate and dorsolateral prefron-
tal cortex (dlPFC) to African American faces relative to Caucasian faces. The
magnitude of dlPFC activity also predicted the relationship between IAT and
Stroop task performance. These results suggest that individuals with implicit
racial biases exert greater effort in controlling reactions to out-group members
in part by engaging prefrontal circuitry.
    This initial body of research has laid the groundwork for discovering the
relationships between social behavior and brain correlates of the psychological
constructs underlying racial bias. To guard against the influence of cultural
stereotypes, internally motivated, low-bias individuals experience greater
demand on executive resources than do high-bias individuals. In contrast,
high-bias individuals experience greater demand during interracial encounters.
Such endeavors inform debates about the role of neuroscience in contributing
to an understanding of racial and other social prejudices.

Impression formation and trust
In addition to social category information, other personal attributes are readily
judged from physical features and inferred from nonverbal behaviors to form
general impressions of individuals. One such personality trait is trustworthi-
ness. Many individuals end up in bankruptcy because they are susceptible to
financial scams. People who find themselves in this predicament may be poor
at evaluating the trustworthiness of those who are trying to get their money.
    Neuroimaging studies have found that assessment of trustworthiness based
on facial appearance alone is associated with activity in brain regions involved
in other aspects of social cognition and emotional evaluation. In particular,
enhanced activity is observed in the insula when participants are shown faces
of individuals whom others have judged to have an untrustworthy appearance,
and enhanced activity is observed in the medial PFC, orbitofrontal cortex, and
caudate for faces deemed trustworthy. The amygdala responds to both highly
trustworthy and highly untrustworthy faces; however it is more sensitive to
differences in untrustworthy faces (Figure 11.11A). These patterns are evident
even when the faces are not explicitly appraised for trust, indicating automatic
evaluative processes. Confirming the neuroimaging findings, autistic individuals
380 ■ CHAPTER 11

(A)
                                                                                                         2.5




                                                                  Parameter estimate (arbitrary units)
                                                                                                         2.0


                                                                                                         1.5


                                                                                                         1.0


                                                                                                         0.5

    R                                                      L
                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                               2      3        4       5         6
                                                                                                                          Trustworthiness


(B)                                                     Patients with bilateral amygdala lesions

                           7                                                                                                                                          3
                           6             S.M.                                                                  J.M.                          R.H.                                  Controls


Difference from control
                                                                                                                                                                      2
                           5
                           4                                                                                                                                          1
                           3
                                                                                                                                                                      0
                           2

     mean (in SD)
                           1                                                                                                                                         –1
                           0
                                                                                                                                                                     –2
                          –1
                          –2                                                                                                                                         –3
                               0   20   40   60   80    100 0     20   40    60   80    100 0      20                                       40       60   80   100        0   20   40   60    80   100
                                                  Face stimulus (rank-ordered by mean control rating)

Figure 11.11 Evaluating trust in
faces (A) A region of the amygdala
(arrows) responds strongly to                                     (see Introductory Box) and patients with bilateral amygdala damage (Figure
both very untrustworthy and very                                  11.11B) tend to judge untrustworthy faces as more trustworthy.
trustworthy faces, with weak
responses to intermediate values of                                   The impression of trustworthiness is gleaned from a rapid, global impres-
trustworthiness. However, this region                             sion of the face that occurs within 100 milliseconds and improves little with
is more sensitive to detecting subtle                             longer exposure. This pattern indicates the importance of a “first glance”
differences in untrustworthy faces than                           prior to initiation of saccades to specific facial features. Behavioral studies
in trustworthy faces, as indicated by                             have shown that judgments of trustworthiness are related to competence and
the shape of the function depicted
in the right-hand panel (plotted data                             facial attractiveness—a fact exploited by Hollywood casting agents, politicians,
come from the right amygdala). (B)                                and business managers who hire salespeople. Analysis of shifts in eye gaze
Trustworthiness ratings from three                                and body movements also contributes to trustworthiness appraisals in that
patients with bilateral amygdala                                  individuals who are “shifty-eyed” and restless are rated as less trustworthy
damage (S.M., J.M., R.H.). Values                                 because of apparent nervousness. Such cues are also used by airline security
plotted in the left three panels depict
each patient’s standard deviation                                 officers to identify potentially suspect passengers. These findings reveal how
(SD) from the mean ratings of control                             the basic building blocks of social perception, which are based on nonverbal
subjects, which are illustrated in                                cues related to gaze analysis, joint attention, and emotional evaluation, can be
the far-right panel. Each patient                                 combined to infer personality attributes of others. Studies of trust in economic
rated untrustworthy faces as more                                 games are described in Chapter 14.
trustworthy than controls did, but the
patients’ performance became normal
for more trustworthy faces. (A after
Said et al. 2008; B after Adolphs et al.
                                                                  Understanding the Actions and Emotions of Others
1998.)                                                            To successfully navigate the social environment, it is important to link social
                                                                  and affective cues with behavioral outcomes during interpersonal interactions.
                                                                  This ability ranges from mere mimicry of motoric and emotional gestures to
                                                                  more complex forms of goal-directed imitation behavior, and ultimately to
                                                                                               SOCIAL COGNITION       ■ 381


modeling one’s behavior after the behavior of others to transmit learning and
establish cultural practices. In humans, social competence is further facilitated
by inferring mental states in others, and attributing the actions of others to
their beliefs, goals, desires, and feelings. This multifaceted capacity is called
mentalizing or theory of mind.
    Scholars debate about whether mentalizing occurs though simulation of the
behaviors and internal states of others (e.g., mentally representing potential ac-
tions, feelings, or thoughts of others as if they were one’s own) or by the building
of theories (scripts) of how others typically behave in particular contexts. The
philosopher Daniel Dennett suggests that social interactions benefit when one
adopts an intentional stance—that is, assuming that others are agents motivated
to behave in a way that is consistent with their current mental state, which
may differ from one’s own mental states and/or the reality of the situation. As
detailed in the discussion that follows, coding and interpreting the actions and
mental states of others are complex processes involving both dedicated neural
systems and the co-opting of domain-general functions like working memory
and symbolic representation.

Mirror neurons
To interpret behaviors meaningfully, it is useful to code actions performed by
others in a way that is related to one’s own actions. In the 1990s, the discovery
of mirror neurons in the premotor cortex of the macaque monkey brain sparked
much interest and debate about possible neural mechanisms underlying action
representation. These neurons in and around the inferior frontal gyrus (area F5,
presumably homologous to the inferior frontal convexity in humans) increase
their activity not only when a grasping action is selected and performed, but
also when that action is passively viewed while it is being performed by another
animal or a human experimenter (Figure 11.12).
    Such mirror responses are more robust when participants are observing
goal-directed biological actions compared to non-goal-directed biological
actions (mimes) or goal-directed mechanical actions (e.g., a hammer hitting a
nail). The responses often track the general goal of the motor act (e.g., putting
food into a bucket) rather than the specific features of the movement, such as
the initial starting position or orientation of a hand executing the action. A
smaller proportion of F5 neurons respond to both visual and auditory features
of a unique goal-directed biological action (e.g., ringing a bell).




Neuronal
                                                                              Figure 11.12 A mirror neuron in the
response                                                                      premotor cortex of a macaque monkey The
                                                                              experimenter places and removes a food morsel
                                                                              from a tray while the monkey watches. The
                    20
   Number of
                                                                              raster plot shows the neuronal responses (the
                                                                              vertical line indicates the time the morsel was
                                                                              placed on the tray), which are compiled in the
                                                                              histograms below. The neuron activates both
action potentials
                                                                              when the monkey watches passively (left panel)
                     0                                                        and when the monkey itself retrieves the morsel
                                      Time                                    (right panel). (After Rizzolatti et al. 1996.)
382 ■ CHAPTER 11

(A)                                                       (B)         Premotor                              Motor/somatosensory
                                                                      (motor)                               cortex

                                                                  dPM

             F6
                                                           vPM
                                     LIP
                                                                                                                        Temporal
                              VIP
                                                                                                                        (visual)
                               AIP
                               AIP
                       IPS
                              PFG
                              PFG                                                                                           MTG
       VPF
                  F5
         IAS
                             STS
                             STS

                        IT




                                       Figure 11.13 The monkey and human mirror systems (A) Schematic of the
                                       key components in the macaque brain (shaded in yellow). This system includes
                                       the ventral premotor cortex (F5), ventral parietal regions (PFG, AIP) and their
                                       interconnections (solid lines). Connections between the mirror system and some
                                       other brain areas are indicated by dashed lines. AIP, anterior intraparietal area; F6,
                                       dorsal premotor cortex; IAS, inferior limb of the arcuate sulcus; IPS, intraparietal
                                       sulcus; IT, inferior temporal lobe; LIP, lateral intraparietal area; STS, superior temporal
                                       sulcus; VIP, ventral intraparietal area; VPF, ventral prefrontal cortex. (B) The putative
                                       human mirror system. Data are from an fMRI study that identified reliable activations
                                       across individual subjects for both action observation and action execution. dPM,
                                       dorsal premotor cortex; MTG, middle temporal gyrus; vPM, ventral premotor cortex.
                                       (A after Rizzolatti and Sinigaglia 2010; B from Keysers et al. 2010.)


                                           Mirror neurons have also been found in a region of rostral inferior parietal
                                       cortex that projects to premotor area F5, implicating an interconnected fronto-
                                       parietal mirror system (Figure 11.13). Some neurons in this circuit also exhibit
                                       context specificity of the action sequences related to the end goal (e.g., selectively
                                       responding to grasping actions that lead to eating rather than grasping actions
                                       that simply move an object from one place to another). Neurons in the superior
                                       temporal sulcus (STS) relay perceptual information about biological motion to
                                       the parietal component of this system but do not exhibit mirroring responses
                                       themselves. Because the observation of actions does not automatically elicit
                                       an analogous motor response, activity in this premotor circuit is inhibited to
                                       prevent obligatory copying behavior.
                                           A number of investigators have used this neurophysiological evidence to
                                       speculate about the importance of these areas of the primate brain in generating
                                       an understanding of the intentions of others, language acquisition, and empathy
                                       (discussed below), as well as the functional deficits apparent in behavioral
                                       disorders such as autism (see the Introductory Box). Whether these implications
                                       will be validated remains to be seen, and caution is warranted. For one thing,
                                       adult monkeys do not learn much by direct imitation—a fact that undermines
                                       what would perhaps be the simplest interpretation of the role of mirror neurons.
                                       And in humans, where these speculations are most pertinent, the evidence for
                                       mirror neurons is suggestive but does not correspond directly to the anatomical
                                       or functional properties observed in monkeys. For instance, cortical activity
                                       detected with fMRI in response to similar paradigms in humans is more widely
                                       distributed throughout the motor system and STS; moreover, similar activity
                                                                                       SOCIAL COGNITION   ■ 383


occurs when people mime. Unlike the monkey electrophysiological data, most
of the human evidence has come from brain imaging studies. These studies do
not have the spatial resolution to determine whether the executed and observed
actions are being signaled by the same neurons (a key criterion for defining a
mirror neuron) or by adjacent ones within the same general brain area.
    Some researchers taking an embodied cognition perspective (see Chapter 9)
have suggested that mirror neurons provide a means for understanding social
actions through direct perceptual-motor links. Others believe such linkages are
simply established by experience through general associative learning processes
and do not represent a unique social cognitive function. Whatever the correct
interpretation, these observations indicate that viewing actions pertinent to
particular behavioral goals influences the activity of some frontoparietal neurons
in the same way as performing those actions does.

Perspective taking and mental-state attribution
Although mirroring functions help establish shared representations used for
understanding agent-directed actions, they do not readily distinguish the ex-
ecution of one’s own actions from the observation of similar actions executed by
others. Moreover, actions do not map onto intentions in a one-to-one manner.
Mirroring depends on another agent being present in the immediate environment
and cannot account for other forms of mental simulation, such as self-projection
into past or future circumstances. In short, differentiating one’s actions from
those of others and understanding the reasons behind others’ actions clearly
require cognitive abilities and mechanisms that go beyond mirroring.
     Key among these is the ability to flexibly adopt the perspective of another
individual (third-person perspective) and distinguish that viewpoint from one’s
own (first-person perspective). Because an egocentric view of the world may be
part of a default mode of information processing, adopting other people’s perspec-
tives and inferring their beliefs, motives, or feelings requires a disengagement
of self-directed thoughts, a redirection of attention to the mental and physical
states of others, and a decoupling of knowledge of the actual unfolding of events
from other people’s perceptions of those events. Memory is also important in
this process because prior knowledge about the personality traits and response
patterns of others in similar contexts refines one’s own interpretation of the
current social context and the possible responses to it.
     Neuroimaging studies have compared first- and third-person perspective
taking across different cognitive, emotional, and motoric domains. For instance,
participants might imagine themselves or someone else performing specific
actions, responding to a painful stimulus, or reacting to an emotional scenario.
Other studies of mental-state attributions have asked participants to consider
the viewpoints of different characters in stories or cartoons, to guess what an
opponent might do during an interactive game, or to judge whether historical
figures had access to knowledge about specific artifacts. While many studies
have used explicit instructions to adopt the perspective of another agent, in
social situations often the intentions and mental states of others are inferred
spontaneously.
     In all these domains, taking the perspective of others and inferring their
mental states elicits activity in a set of brain regions that includes the medial
PFC (most consistently the paracingulate cortex), temporal polar cortex, right
inferior parietal cortex, temporoparietal junction, and superior temporal sulcus
(Figure 11.14). Because of the complexity of the mentalizing construct, hetero-
geneity of the tasks involved, and variety of the control conditions employed,
it is difficult to ascribe specific functions to these brain areas. Nonetheless, the
temporoparietal junction may be particularly concerned with transient inferences
based on the current context, whereas the medial prefrontal cortex may be more
384 ■ CHAPTER 11

(A) Temporal pole                                                  (B) Superior temporal sulcus




                                                                                                                           Stories


                                                                                                                           Inferred
                                                                                                                           knowledge


                                                                                                                           Animations




Inferred  Stories    Social         Cartoons    Animations                                  Social              Cartoons
knowledge            transgressions                                                         transgressions



(C) Paracingulate cortex

                                                                        Figure 11.14 Brain regions implicated in mentalizing
Animations                                                              tasks Across various domains, activity in the temporal
                                                                        pole (A), superior temporal sulcus (B), and paracingulate
Inferred
knowledge
                                                                        cortex (C) is elicited when participants adopt the per-
                                                                        spectives of other individuals and infer their mental states.
                                                                        (After Frith and Frith 2003.)
Stories


Social
trans-
gressions




    Interactive games      Cartoons



                                               concerned with inferences based on more enduring traits or qualities. Although
                                               some view these regions as simply supporting domain-general cognitive opera-
                                               tions needed to solve the mentalizing tasks (the functions needed to retrieve
                                               memories or semantic knowledge, reallocate attentional resources, manipulate
                                               internal representations, etc.), recent evidence indicates some specificity in the
                                               relevant brain activity for solving social problems. For instance, the medial PFC
                                               activation during mentalizing tasks is greater than during general reasoning
                                               tasks that do not involve social evaluations.

                                               Theory of mind in children and apes
                                               In the late 1970s, psychologists David Premack and Guy Woodruff raised the
                                               question of whether chimpanzees and other great apes have the capacity to
                                               represent and understand the mental states of conspecifics in the same general
                                               way that humans do. Observations of great apes in the wild indicate that they
                                               engage in deception (to hoard food sources, for example), which requires at
                                               least some understanding of where conspecifics are orienting their attention
                                               and what they expect to happen in a given social context.
                                                   To ask whether chimpanzees have basic mentalizing abilities, experimenters
                                               paired subordinate and dominant chimpanzees in a large chamber (Figure
                                               11.15). The subordinate chimp was shown food items that the dominant chimp
                                               could either see or not see, or was shown that the location of a food item had or
                                                                                                SOCIAL COGNITION         ■ 385


                                                                                       Figure 11.15 Testing mentalizing
                                                                                       ability in chimpanzees This
                                                                                       socially competitive paradigm tests
                                                                                       what chimpanzees know about
                                                                                       the viewpoint of a conspecific. A
                                                                                       subordinate chimp is shown multiple
                                                                                       food caches that are either out of
                                                                                       the view or in the view of a dominant
                                                                                       chimp. Subordinate chimps prefer to
                                                                                       move toward the food cache that is
                          Subordinate                                                  out of view of the dominant chimp,
                                                                                       conferring a behavioral advantage.
                                                                                       Chimps exhibit similar behavior when
                                                                      Dominant
                                        Food                                           a food cache is switched to a different
                                                                                       location, again unbeknownst to a
                                                                                       dominant chimp. These observations
                                                                                       imply that, in socially competitive
                                                                                       situations, chimps have rudimentary
                                                                                       mentalizing abilities. (After Hare et al.
had not been switched out of view of the dominant chimp. In either case, the           2001.)
subordinate chimp showed a preference for moving toward food items about
which the dominant chimp either had no knowledge or could be assumed to
hold a false belief about its location. Such behavior clearly imparts an advantage
to the subordinate chimp in the context of competition for food with a dominant
conspecific, and could be interpreted as relying on some degree of third-person
perspective taking.
     However, the acid test of a theory of mind is the capacity to predict others’
behavior according to false beliefs that they hold. Understanding the false
beliefs of others requires making a distinction between knowledge about a true
state of affairs and what another individual falsely believes to be true. False-
belief experimental tasks come in two major flavors: location-change tasks and
unexpected-contents tasks (see also Chapter 15). In location-change tasks, an object
is placed in one location, and unbeknownst to a third party, the position of the
object is switched to an alternate location. The participant then must indicate
where the third party would look for the object (its true location or the location
where the third party last viewed the object). In unexpected-contents tasks, an
object is placed in a container, and unbeknownst to a third party, the object is
replaced by another one. The participant must then indicate which object the
third party thinks is in the container.
     Humans develop false-belief attributions to characters in animated vignettes
by about 4 years of age. However, because these tasks require complex nar-
rative and action sequence comprehension, working memory, and inhibition
of rapid responses, there is some debate about the specificity of the findings.
Some investigators have proposed that children between 3 and 4 years old
simply learn to select the correct responses in the task rather than depending
on theory-of-mind abilities. Nonetheless, children of this age routinely use
words like pretend, think, know, want, and like, implying some knowledge about
mental states. In contrast, autistic children (and autistic adults) generally fail
false-belief tests, although some investigators find the evidence to be equivo-
cal because of the potentially confounding deficits in language abilities and
executive function present in autism.
     Given the controversy over whether children and chimpanzees possess
theory-of-mind abilities, some investigators have turned to the distinction
made in memory research between implicit and explicit processes (see Chapter
8). Most researchers believe that young children and great apes can implicitly
(i.e., unconsciously) track another individual’s mental state. However, they also
admit that there is currently no convincing evidence that young children and
apes can explicitly represent the mental contents of another individual, as in
386 ■ CHAPTER 11

                   the ability to have thoughts such as “I know my friend thinks that the food is
                   in location A when I know it is really at B.” This ability to abstract the mental
                   contents of agents in a social situation and represent them symbolically, also
                   called metarepresentation, presumably requires further cognitive development
                   and is unlikely in young children, let alone non-human primates.

                   Empathy, sympathy, and prosocial behavior
                   Understanding another individual’s beliefs, goals, and intentions also extends to
                   emotion. Although sometimes incorporated into the concept of theory of mind,
                   understanding others’ emotional states recruits brain regions that are not neces-
                   sarily used for making inferences about other mental states. A better descriptor of
                   understanding someone else’s emotional state is empathy. Empathy is the capacity
                   to comprehend and resonate with another’s emotional experience, which leads to
                   a sharing of that person’s feelings. Once an empathic feeling arises, individuals
                   must distinguish their own emotional responses from those of the other individual
                   and regulate their responses accordingly. This ability requires knowing that the
                   other person’s feelings are the source of the shared emotional state.
                       Rather than exemplifying a specific emotion, empathy can be considered
                   a process by which any emotion is shared according to the social context. For
                   instance, having a conversation about a friend’s nervousness before a job inter-
                   view may lead to shared feelings of anxiety. When the conversation shifts to
                   the outcome of the interview, feelings of disappointment may be shared upon
                   hearing that the job was not obtained. Eliciting empathy is critical for effective
                   storytelling and advertising.
                       Empathy differs from sympathy in that a sympathetic reaction does not entail
                   a sharing of emotional experience. Rather, a person who is sympathetic may
                   feel concerned or sorry for the plight of another person but does not feel the
                   actual emotion felt by the other. In the job interview example, for instance, one
                   may feel sympathetic toward a friend’s situation without actually experiencing
                   anxiety or disappointment of one’s own.
                       Empathy has both automatic and controlled components and builds on basic
                   social cognitive and emotion-processing mechanisms. Early in development,
                   human infants will cry in reaction to another infant’s cry and will mimic basic
                   facial emotions expressed by a parent. At about 2 years of age, when self-versus-
                   other distinctions and social emotions such as shame begin to emerge, children
                   express sympathetic concern, such as gestures of consolation to family mem-
                   bers in distress. Although initially such gestures are egocentric (e.g., offering
                   a gift such as a doll to an adult whom the child likes), the offerings gradually
                   become other-focused (e.g., offering a gift that the adult family member likes).
                   With increased cognitive and emotional capacities for perspective taking later
                   in childhood, more complex forms of empathy are conveyed. Forms of empa-
                   thy observed in apes presumably rely on more automatic aspects of emotion
                   interpretation and somatic activation, which contribute to helping, affiliative,
                   and cooperative behaviors.
                       Psychologist Jean Decety developed a model of empathy that encompasses
                   several of the social and emotional processes, as well as the concepts of mental
                   representation, discussed earlier (Figure 11.16). According to the model, a full
                   empathic response, which can be initiated either automatically or voluntarily,
                   requires the coordinated operation of four component processes:
                    1. Emotion sharing between individuals is based on automatic perception-
                       action coupling and shared somatic-emotional representations that rely
                       on processing in the somatosensory cortex, insula, and anterior cingulate
                       cortex.
                                                                                                  SOCIAL COGNITION         ■ 387


Automatic                                                                                Figure 11.16 A proposed model of
initiation                                                                               empathy A full empathic response
                         Emotion sharing                                                 to another individual is thought to
                                                                                         depend on brain regions involved
                      Somatosensory cortex,                                              in sharing somatic and emotional
                         limbic system                                                   responses, self-awareness and self-
                                                                                         other distinctions, mental flexibility in
                                                                                         social contexts (including perspective
                                                                                         taking), and emotion regulation.
                        Mental flexibility                       Self-awareness

                      Medial and dorsal PFC                  Inferior parietal cortex,
                                                                 PFC, and insula
Intentional
initiation




                       Emotion regulation

                     Anterior cingulate cortex,
                            lateral and
                        ventromedial PFC




 2. Self-awareness and the distinction between self and other are also thought
    to entail processing in the parietal lobes, prefrontal cortex, and insula.
 3. Mental flexibility to adopt the perspective of another individual recruits
    medial and dorsolateral prefrontal regions, among others.
 4. Emotion regulation operates on the emotional and somatic states generated
    by engaging executive control mechanisms in the anterior cingulate and
    lateral and ventromedial prefrontal cortex.
    Evidence to support the emotion-sharing component comes from studies
that ask participants to observe another individual experience an emotion and
to experience the same emotion themselves (or imagine their own emotional
reaction to the same situation). The logic of these studies is similar to the mir-
roring tasks described earlier, but it concerns emotional states rather than motor
actions. The brain regions involved in these tasks include the insula, anterior
cingulate cortex, and secondary somatosensory cortices (Figure 11.17A), which
are thought to represent a shared feeling state with another individual and
promote a motivation to act. These areas are distinct from those that mediate
the self-awareness (see Figure 11.1) and mental flexibility (Figure 11.17B; see
also Figure 11.15) components of empathy, as well as the mirror neuron circuit
for action understanding (see Figure 11.13). Brain regions that support emotion-
regulating processes are discussed in Chapter 10.
    Although it is generally assumed that empathy leads to helping others and
altruistic actions, additional factors influence such prosocial behaviors. For
instance, high levels of arousal associated with observing another’s troubled
emotional state can lead to personal distress, a lack of emotion regulation,
and thus an inability to take action other than to alleviate one’s own distress.
Prosocial behaviors are more likely when an individual is in a positive mood,
when the action required is not unpleasant or onerous, and when the person to
be helped is not a direct competitor. Adults (but not young children) may also
engage in helpful behaviors to repair sad moods because they understand the
social rewards associated with the actions. Nonetheless, in some circumstances
388 ■ CHAPTER 11

Figure 11.17 Brain regions that            (A)
mediate emotion sharing (A)                                                     Non-painful      Painful
Empathy tasks entail asking
participants to consider the emotional            ACC
state of others and themselves
in response to emotion-eliciting
situations, such as those that evoke
pain. The tasks may require watching
another individual’s emotional reaction
or imaging the reaction of others or
oneself in response to a painful action.                   Bilateral
Brain regions common to both self-                      anterior insula
and other-focused painful reactions
include the anterior cingulate cortex      (B)
(ACC) and insula. (B) Brain regions
that mediate the emotion-sharing
component of empathy (orange)
are distinct from those that mediate
the cognitive ability to flexibly
adopt the perspective of another
individual (green). AI, anterior insula;
MFC, medial prefrontal cortex; SII,        MFC
secondary somatosensory cortex;                  ACC
STS, superior temporal sulcus; TP,
temporal pole; TPJ, temporoparietal
junction. (From Hein and Singer 2008.)                          AI
                                                                          SII




                                                                                  TP
                                                                                         STS
                                                                                               TPJ



                                           empathy can lead to antisocial behavior, as when an accomplice is empathic
                                           toward the motives of a fellow criminal.


                                           Social Competition
                                           Competition among members of a species’ social group establishes hierarchies
                                           that affect the distribution of wealth, resource allocation, mating opportunities,
                                           and division of labor. Leaders of the social group are responsible for defending
                                           against intruders and for establishing acceptable norms of behavior. Members
                                           who do not adhere to the rules face punishment or ostracism. Provided that
                                           governance and rank are not entirely inherited, group dynamics can influence
                                           the maintenance of the hierarchy, leading to social upheaval and a change in
                                           social structure. The biobehavioral processes that mediate social competition
                                           and its consequences for the individual are described here.
                                               Of course, social competitive forces must be balanced by social cooperation
                                           and affiliative functions that promote social bonds among a particular group’s
                                           members. Some evolutionary anthropologists believe that the drive for social
                                           cooperation was particularly influential in the evolution of advanced intellectual
                                           skills in humans. These topics are covered in Box 11B and Chapter 15.

                                           Social rank and stress
                                           For species that live in social groups, the relative dominance ordering (rank)
                                           of individuals has important implications for physical and mental health. In
                                           Westernized human societies, lower socioeconomic status is associated with
                                           increased risk of cardiovascular, respiratory, rheumatoid, and psychiatric
                                                                                                       SOCIAL COGNITION         ■ 389



  ■ BOX 11B SOCIAL BONDS AND KINSHIP

 S       ocial signals related to mating,
         bonding, and kinship are impor-
         tant for the maintenance and
 survival of social groups. Some primate
 species analyze secondary sex color-
                                               the urine of an unrelated male, at which
                                               time they mate repeatedly with the same
                                               male and form a selective and long-last-
                                               ing pair bond. During mating, oxytocin
                                               and vasopressin are released in meso-
                                                                                            instance, oxytocin administration in the
                                                                                            central nucleus of the amygdala engages
                                                                                            inhibitory neurons to decrease fear sig-
                                                                                            naling, increase parasympathetic tone,
                                                                                            and reduce release of the stress hor-
 ation in the face and anogenital regions      limbic pathways, including the nucleus       mone corticosterone in social contexts.
 to select mates. Female rhesus mon-           accumbens, where they interact with the         Many primates, particularly arboreal
 keys prefer looking at males whose            dopaminergic reward system (see Chap-        species, distinguish kin from non-kin
 faces are redder, and this coloration is in   ter 14). This neurochemical interaction      by vocal characteristics alone. Female
 turn related to the amount of circulating     presumably links social information of the   vervet monkeys distinguish the cries of
 testosterone in males during the mat-         partner with reward circuits to reinforce    juvenile monkeys in their troop. A mother
 ing season. In mandrills, a male’s social     the sexual preference and solidify the       vervet will respond selectively to the cry
 dominance rank is accompanied by con-         social bond. If oxytocin receptors are       of her own infant and will look prefer-
 tinually updated changes in secondary         blocked during mating, long-term partner     entially at other mothers in the troop
 sexual characteristics such as testicular     preferences are not established.             when their own infants cry. Auditory
 volume and reddening of anogenital skin.           In other species, oxytocin and va-      characteristics of primate calls, such as
 These characteristics facilitate the mating   sopressin also play important roles in       the acoustic structure and number of
 success of the most dominant members          social recognition. Rats given vasopres-     vocalizations, are also used to indicate
 of a species.                                 sin show increased social recognition        social rank and physical health to other
     In some species, such as prairie          abilities by olfactory cues, as measured     members of the group.
 voles, mating leads to the establishment      by habituation in sniffing behavior toward
 of monogamous partner preferences. A          a recently introduced partner. Vasopres-
 breeding pair of prairie voles shares the     sin and oxytocin knockout mice exhibit
                                                                                            References
 same nest, intruders of either sex are        a form of social amnesia in which they       GHAZANFAR, A. A. AND L. R. SANTOS (2004)
 rejected, and males contribute to care        fail to habituate to the presence of a re-   Primate brains in the wild: The sensory
 of the young. Even following death, a         cently introduced partner, despite normal    bases for social interactions. Nat. Rev.
 new mate is accepted by either sex only       habituation to the repeated presentation     Neurosci. 5: 203–216.
 rarely (about 20 percent of the time).        of other odorants. These social recogni-     INSEL, T. R. AND R. D. FERNALD (2004) How
 Offspring remain sexually immature until      tion abilities in rodents have been linked   the brain processes social information:
 they leave the natal group, and females       to activity in mesolimbic structures,        Searching for the social brain. Annu. Rev.
 undergo puberty only when exposed to          including the amygdala and septum. For       Neurosci. 27: 697–722.




diseases, as well as increased mortality rates (including infant mortality). Both
physical and psychosocial stressors contribute to these effects (see Box 10B for
a description of the stress system). The impact of rank remains significant even
when other lifestyle factors, such as higher incidence of alcohol use or poor diet,
are taken into consideration. Although socioeconomic status indicates rank at
a macro level of social organization, the complex, nested structure of human
cultures yields ranks at multiple social scales (e.g., within one’s family, place
of employment, or peer group).
    Across species, the relationship between rank and stress further depends on
the characteristics of the culture. For despotic social groups—in which resource
access is skewed and dominance is attained through intimidation—stress is
particularly high for subordinates. Stress, however, can shift among group
members depending on how dominance is maintained. Dominant group
members can experience high stress when their rank must be maintained by
constant physical aggression (as in ring-tailed lemurs), or during times of major
hierarchical reorganization when their rank is at risk of being lost. Thus, stress
is associated with both lower rank and life “at the top” (Figure 11.18).
    Subordinates have greater physiological indices of stress relative to dominant
members when dominance is asserted through psychological intimidation (e.g.,
eye contact, vocalizations) or for social groups with stable, inherited social hi-
erarchies, as in female rhesus macaques. Subordinates can reduce their stress if
coping strategies are available. In non-human primates, these activities include
forming social coalitions through grooming and roaming to avoid encounters
390 ■ CHAPTER 11

Figure 11.18 Rank and stress in                                                0.06
baboons By observing wild male




                                         Residuals of fecal glucocorticoids
baboons over a 9-year period,                                                  0.04
researchers characterized the
relationship between dominance rank
and biomarkers of stress. Measures                                             0.02
of fecal glucocorticoids increased
with lower dominance rank, with                                                0.00
the exception of the most dominant
baboons, who also experienced higher
stress levels. (After Gesquiere et al.                                        –0.02
2011.)
                                                                              –0.04

                                                                                      1   2   3   4   5    6 7 8 9 10 11   12 13 14+
                                                                                                          Dominance rank




                                         with dominant members. Rank-induced stress is evident across a variety of
                                         physiological measures, including hyperactive glucocorticoid secretion (see
                                         Figure 11.18), hypertension, impaired reproduction, immunosuppression, in-
                                         hibition of neurogenesis, reduced synaptic plasticity and dendritic atrophy in
                                         brain regions such as the hippocampus. Given that the hippocampus provides
                                         negative feedback to the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (see Box 10B), the
                                         physical consequences are prolonged in situations of chronic stress.

                                         Power motivation and dominance contests
                                         To usurp status in a social hierarchy and ascend in rank, an individual has to
                                         be both physically able to win dominance competitions and psychologically
                                         motivated to achieve power and status. In non-human animals, dominance
                                         contests are typically determined through physical battles between dominant
                                         and subordinate members. In humans, dominance contests can take the form
                                         of political debates, sporting events, or battles of wit, intellect, or talent.
                                             Power motivation in humans is defined as an enduring preference for having
                                         impact on other people or the world at large. Individuals who express a need
                                         for power find this impact on others rewarding, and they are motivated to seek
                                         out opportunities to exert social influence. Power motivation can be implicitly
                                         measured through performance on a picture story exercise. In this exercise,
                                         participants are shown ambiguous pictures of people and are asked to write
                                         hypothetical narratives about them. The stories are then coded for the presence
                                         of power motivation themes, including descriptions of situations involving
                                         control or influence over others, fame or prestige, offers of unsolicited help, or
                                         actions that evoke an emotional response in others. Individual differences in the
                                         degree to which these themes are present in the stories is used as a trait marker
                                         of implicit power motivation. Power can also be explicitly primed prior to the
                                         picture story exercise by having participants listen to powerful presidential
                                         speeches, movies, or stories of achievement.
                                             Power motivation is associated with levels of the sympathetic catecholamines
                                         epinephrine and norepinephrine, which promote the release of testosterone
                                         in men (Figure 11.19). Testosterone, in turn, facilitates dopamine release in
                                         the nucleus accumbens, a key component of the brain’s circuitry for reward
                                         learning (see Chapter 14). The neuroendocrine profile of power motivation in
                                         women is less clear but has been related to elevated levels of estradiol. Individu-
                                         als who score high on measures of power motivation tend to engage in more
                                         risky behaviors, attain higher positions in corporate management, and be more
                                         sexually active. However, these individuals also tend to use alcohol more and
                                         to enter into more complicated domestic relationships, including abusive ones.
                                                                                                 SOCIAL COGNITION     ■ 391


                                   Epinephrine/
                                                                                                               Nucleus
 Challenge,                      Norepinephrine
                                                                                                               accumbens
  victory                        (released from
                               the adrenal glands)


                                                             Dopamine
               Power               Testosterone                                    Social
                                                         (released from
              motivation         (released from                                  reward
                                                           the nucleus
                                    the testes)                                 learning
                                                           accumbens)
                                                                                                     Adrenal
                                                                                                     glands

 Challenge,                          Cortisol
  defeat                       (released from the
                                 adrenal glands)

Figure 11.19 Power motivation moderates neuroendocrine effects of
dominance contests In males, dominance challenges are associated with                  Kidneys
elevated release of epinephrine and norepinephrine from the adrenal glands,
which stimulates testosterone secretion in the testes. Contest victories yield
further increases in testosterone. Contest defeats increase the release of the
stress hormone cortisol from the adrenal gland, which lowers testosterone
levels. Testosterone has central effects on the brain’s reward learning system
by facilitating the release of dopamine in the nucleus accumbens. Men who
are high in power motivation are prone to take on risk and challenges, and
these individuals have even higher testosterone fluctuations in response to                        Testes
dominance contests. In females, the hormone estradiol, released from the
ovaries, has been reported to have effects (not shown) similar to those of
testosterone in men.


    Endocrine markers further indicate the outcome of a dominance contest.
Victory is associated with a surge in testosterone in men and estradiol in women.
In contrast, the stress hormone cortisol is elevated following defeat. These effects
of winning and losing are even present in social observers who are not direct
participants in the competition, as in the case of sports fans observing a team
match, or voters participating in a political election.

Summary
 1. Social interactions engage a distributed set of brain regions involved in self-refer-
    ential processing, perception of biologically relevant cues such as body stance and
    biological motion, social categorization, and emotion interpretation.
 2. Whether social interactions are an emergent property of the cognitive functions
    described in other chapters or a core set of specialized brain structures and pro-
    cesses has been widely debated. A reasonable view is that both domain-specific
    and domain-general factors contribute to social cognition.
 3. The ability to think reflexively about the self and our sense of embodiment
    depends on processing in the temporoparietal junction, medial parietal, and
    prefrontal cortical regions, as well as specialized sectors of the visual association
    cortex.
 4. The perception of socially relevant cues arising from the faces and bodies of others
    depends on the fusiform gyrus, superior temporal sulcus, amygdala, and orbito-
    frontal cortex.
 5. The categorization of individuals as members of social groups is rapid and auto-
    matic, and it depends in part on evaluative processes in the amygdala. Automatic
    influences of social stereotypes engage conflict-monitoring and self-regulation
    functions of the anterior cingulate gyrus and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex.
 6. Theory-of-mind abilities, though present implicitly in great apes and young chil-
    dren, increase in complexity in late human development and depend on process-
    ing in the medial prefrontal cortex, temporal polar cortex, inferior parietal cortex,
    temporoparietal junction, and superior temporal sulcus, as well as areas that
    mediate symbolic representation more broadly.
392 ■ CHAPTER 11

                                             7. Empathizing with the emotional state of others involves regions implicated in
